Foxes

Unstructured words: because farmers fur hole leave people stay tails trail reason
We think that foxes have been living in England for a very long time. Fossils tell us that they were alive at the time of the mammoths. They can be spotted by their red fur and long bushy tails as they run in the grass. They are also often seen in streets and gardens.
A fox normally lives by itself, often in an old rabbit warren. It kills all the rabbits in the warren. Then it blocks up all but one of the exits so that no enemy can get in to attack it from behind. The exit that is left open is usually well-hidden by bracken and bushes.
In April, the vixen will have up to five cubs.  These have dark fur and cannot see until they are two weeks old. At six weeks, the vixen and cubs leave the nest. The cubs begin to hunt for insects and eggs and also pretend to track small animals. By ten weeks of age, the fur on their backs is red and their tails are getting bushy. They can feed themselves but stay with the vixen for quite a long time.
Foxes feed on eggs, hens, ducks, small mammals and even fish and crabs when they can get them. For this reason local farmers see them as pests. They think that the best method of getting rid of them is to hunt them with dogs. This sport is called fox-hunting.  People who support fox-hunting like to see the hunters on horseback in their red jackets with their dogs at their heels. Others think that it is a cruel sport. They protest by trying to divert the dogs from the fox’s trail. What do you think?
Horse Riding

Unstructured words: buy called canter done fields however learn learned more right same school
Horse riding is a common pastime today.  Riders say that it is a skill that helps to keep them fit. It also gives them a lot of fun. It costs quite a lot to buy and keep a horse or pony. However you can hire them from a riding school at less expense. You can even hire the equipment you will need. You will need a hard hat with a chin strap to protect you if you fall, and riding boots with a heel to stop your foot slipping from the stirrups.
All the equipment that is put on the horse is called the tack. You must learn to tack up.  This is the correct method of putting the tack on the horse. Then you can stand on the horse’s left side, put your left foot in the stirrup and spring up. As you do this, you swing your right leg over the horse’s back and sit down.
To get the horse to walk, you must squeeze his sides with your legs, saying “WALK” at the same time. If you want to ride quickly you can trot or canter. Trotting will feel bumpy until you have learned the art of rising and sitting in time with the horse.  Cantering gives a far more even ride and is best done on grass. Grass is also the best site on which to gallop. This is the fastest way to ride. It is best started up a hill so that you can control your speed.
For many riders, the best fun is in jumping the horse. You can start by just jumping over things as you ride in fields or woods. Then you can construct more difficult man-made jumps. You may even win prizes for jumping if you get very good at it.
The Roman Baths at Bath

Unstructured words: because spices they

Have you visited the Roman ruins at Bath?  At the time that the Romans arrived there in 70 AD it was only a tiny hamlet. The King’s Bath Spring was just an open site. The hot frothy spring was 10 m long and 5 m wide The land beside it was damp and boggy with a small thicket of trees.
This spring became sacred to the Romans. They began to construct a bathing complex there. Pipes led from the hot spring to a big bath, constantly filling it with the hot water.  Small baths were then fed from there. As time went on, they kept adding extra hot and cold baths. The ruins of this network of baths can still be seen.
As soon as the Romans had taken off their thick garments, they all went to bathe in the big, hot bath. Next they sat in a very hot hall, where their slaves had to rub them with sweet-smelling spices. Lastly, they had to jump into a very cold bath before dressing.
The Romans did not bathe because they were filthy. For them it was a time to be lively and cheerful. It was probably a bit like being in a swimming pool today.

Toby Jugs

Unstructured words: coat people used worth

Can you describe a Toby jug? Many people who collect china as a hobby like to look for them at car boot sales or in second-hand shops. The name Toby is taken from a man in a poem from the 1700s. This poem tells of Toby Fillpot - a boozing man! The story says that, after his body had rotted, clay from his grave was used to make a jug. This began the craze for Toby jugs.
Most Toby jugs are 22 to 23 ins tall. They are made in the shape of a very fat man in a tricorn hat which is often black. The man is usually seated and holding a jug of ale.
Sometimes he has a glass in his hands as well.  He has a long coat, breeches, stockings and black boots. He stares at you with a smile.  As time went on, extra items were added to the jug. Some were given a pipe. Some were standing up. Some were made to look like squires or men from the army. In the late 1800s there was even one depicting Lord Nelson. Hundreds were made because so many people wanted them. Even female Toby jugs were created.
Some people think that barmen used the jugs to carry ale. This is not very likely because the neck is too small. The shape also makes it very hard to wash the inside. It is likely that most of them just stood on a shelf as ornaments just as they do today.
The oldest Toby jugs were made in Staffordshire in the 1700s. Some of the best were made by John Wood. Any of his that still exist today are very rare and are worth a lot of money. It is unlikely that any of these will be found at a car boot sale. If you want to begin to collect these jugs, you may well find one that is less old and less finely made.  This will not cost too much to start you off !

Hares

Unstructured words: Buddhists carried ground matches night

Many of us think that a hare is much the same as a rabbit, but this is not so. Its habits and way of life are quite different Unlike rabbits, hares only like to be out in the dark. There is an old saying, “If you see two hares in the day, there will be ten in the dark.”
Hares live on top of the ground. They dig a small scrape or form in the grass or short crops. In the daytime, they hide in this and do not often stray from it to feed. The baby hares have only this scrape and the grass to protect them from attack by foxes. This means that they have to keep very still all the time their parents are away.
There are many sayings about hares. The most common describes them as “Mad March Hares”. This comes from the way they behave during breeding. On March evenings, they can be seen standing on their back legs having boxing matches! You may think that these are two bucks trying to get the same mate. It is actually a female trying to push away a male. The boxing can last for a very long time.
As hares are night animals, many old tales connect them with the moon. In Anglo-Saxon times, the hare was the mark of the Moon Goddess. Buddhists think that they can see a hare in the moon in the same way that we say we can see a man in the moon.
We think that hares came to England with the Romans. The Romans liked the sport of hunting hares with dogs and may have imported them for this reason. This sport is still carried on today. Luckily, as hares have such long back legs, they can run very fast and usually escape from the dogs. Do you think it is a cruel sport?

Canals

Unstructured words: although brought coal

If you look at a map of England from the end of the 1800s you will see lines across it that you will not find on present day maps. These lines mark canals that do not exist today. In the 1700s the fastest means of transport was by horse. At this time men needed to find a quicker way to transport iron ore and coal.  These had to be sent to the ports for export, and to the big towns of the North and Midlands. They also needed to find better ways of bringing food into these towns to feed the people.
The Duke of Bridgewater at that time had visited both Holland and Italy. Here he had seen goods being transported quickly along canals. These canals had been dug by man.
They connected the mines either directly to towns and ports or sometimes to a river running through a town. He began to construct a canal which would link his own mine with Manchester, 8 miles away. It was called the Bridgewater Canal and was opened in 1761.
The men who dug canals used only hand tools. First they dug the sloping sides and the flat bottom. Then they lined the bottom with clay to prevent the water from seeping away. Canal boats were constructed. These were very shallow. They were 15 metres long but only a tenth as wide. This is why they were called narrow boats. They were pulled by horses which were led along the towpaths beside the canals. Soon a network of canals had been made across the country.
Canals were usually dug in straight lines even if this took them uphill. Locks were constructed to take the boats up the slope in easy steps. At Foxton, in the Midlands, a flight of ten such locks can still be seen. If the hill was very steep a tunnel was dug to carry the canal through.
Eventually there was a network of 6,000 miles of connected rivers and canals for boats to travel along. However, this did not last for long. During the 1800s railways were constructed to link the most important towns.  Rail transport was so much quicker that the canals soon fell into disuse. In fact, they were often filled in so that the rail track could be laid on top of them. Those that were left soon fell into decay.
Today some canals have been mended and, once more, boats can be seen going along them. These boats are not full of goods, but of people having a quiet boating holiday!

Rice

Unstructured words: Chinese fields fried half grow meal people sometimes staple world 

Do you sometimes have an Indian, Italian or Chinese meal? If so, you will probably have rice as part of it. Rice is the basic, or staple, food of more than half the world In many places, rice is the only food that people can afford However, it does not provide a good, well-balanced diet as it is a very starchy food Rice is the seed of a sort of grass. It needs a lot of water and warmth to thrive, so it will not grow in England. Most of it is cultivated in India and China but it can also be grown in parts of ltaly. 
The seeds are_ set in seed beds. When the plants get to 20 ems or so they are planted in paddy fields. These are very wet and muddy and much of the planting still takes place by hand. It is a very tiring job, standing in the mud all day and bending to place the plants in evenly spaced lines across the field.
When the seed is ripe, the crop is also often harvested by hand. The thick stems must be cut and the seeds separated from them. The seeds must be dry before they can be put into bags. If they are damp, they will rot and the crop will be lost.
Rice is usually cooked in water. It absorbs the water and swells up, becoming soft and fluffy. It can also be fried with added ingredients to make it more tasty. In England, we often cook it in milk and sweeten it to make rice-pudding. In Japan, it is also made into Saki, a strong drink.

Whisky

Unstructured words: advertisements dries ferment grain ground heated peat people process real sprout water years yeast young

If you ask most people which products are made in Scotland they will probably think of whisky! Whisky of one sort or another is made in many places but for most people the only real whisky is Scotch. They are willing to pay extra for it, even when added tax or duty makes it very expensive!
The Scots say that it is the Scottish corn, the soft water and the local peat that makes Scotch so distinctive. The process of making whisky is started by malting the corn. This is done by steeping the corn in spring water for three days. Next it is heated and left for seven to ten days until the grain begins to sprout. This mass of sprouting corn is then put into a kiln to dry. The kiln uses peat as fuel. As the malt dries, it absorbs the smell of the peat.
Next the malt is ground up and put into vats made of pine wood. Extra water and yeast are added and the malt is left to ferment. The fermented liquid is then put into a still. Here it is heated to drive off the alcohol. The alcohol is condensed and collected in wooden casks where it is left to age. The wood affects both the taste and the colour of the whisky.  In fact, the finest whisky may be left in the casks for up to ten or twelve years!
You may see whisky in the shops with the spelling whiskey. This is not Scotch whisky but Irish. It is made in much the same way but with different corn and water. These affect both the taste and smoothness of the drink.
Today most whisky, or whiskey, is drunk by men of 40 years and over. Younger men tend to drink beer rather than spirits. Perhaps they feel that whisky is a drink for old men.  Whisky makers are trying to attract younger people by mixing whisky with other sparkling drinks. They are also marketing it with lively new advertisements.

Herbs

Unstructured words: ages century colour considered cures familiar flowers healthy infection monasteries · more once parsley people sage soldiers used

Herbs are fragrant plants that are often added to food and drink to make them taste better.  The stems, flowers and roots are used in many dishes. Most of us are probably familiar with parsley, mint and sage. These are all used in English cooking, but there are many other herbs.
Old documents exist telling us that herbs were in constant use in Roman Britain. In fact, the Romans had over 400 different herbs. They used them in the diet of the army to keep their soldiers healthy. Some herbs were added to food to preserve it. Others were used for curing illness. Some were most effective when drunk in water to combat a chill or infection. Others were made into a paste to rub onto cuts and grazes.
During the Dark Ages, the Danes and Vikings did not make much use of herbs. As a result many of them became extinct in parts of Britain. This did not last for long and, by the ninth century, most monasteries and large houses once more had big herb gardens.  Wines and beers were made from herbs and more complex blends were invented as cures for illness. In those days, grasses and rushes were the only floor coverings used. Adding herbs made the rooms smell sweet. They also prevented unwanted insect life from multiplying!
Herbs are best if they can be used when fresh and green. They can be dried in the sun but they do not taste as strong and they tend to look duller. These days modern equipment is used to freeze-dry them, preserving both the colour and the taste.
Today, many people are once more very interested in using herbs. Some like to mix them with hot water and drink them as teas.  They still consider them to be good for curing illnesses. Some like to use them for making cosmetics. Even if we do not all use them in such ways, many of us like to have them in our gardens for the sweet smells that they give off.

Paper

Unstructured words: beaters brown chemicals companies fibres heated light notes passed through used

If you look carefully at a sheet of tom paper you will see that it consists of tiny fibres. In fact, paper is made from plant fibres matted together to form a sheet. Most paper is made from wood pulp from conifer trees, such as the pine tree. Very fine paper, like that needed to make bank notes, is made from rags. Extra strong brown paper consists of fibres of hemp. This is a thick grassy plant.
Loggers fell the trees so that the logs can be taken to the pulp-mills. Here large blades Strip off the bark and chop up the trunks. The chips of wood are then crushed by rollers or heated with chemicals. Both of these methods split the wood into fibres. Then more liquid is added to make a pulp. The pulp is passed between beaters. These fray the fibres so that they will mat together.
This slushy pulp then passes over a belt of fine mesh where some of the liquid is sucked out. Next it passes between rollers. These squeeze out more liquid and press the fibres together into a sheet or web. If the paper is to be used for printing, starch is added to help the paper take up the ink evenly.
The web of paper then passes between hot rollers until it is quite dry. It is taken off onto very big rolls. These are sold to companies for many different uses. These companies may need to treat the paper in different ways. For example, paper that is to be used for taking photos will be coated with light-sensitive chemicals.

Lundy Island

Unstructured words: because bird island half mainland marine round sea tentacles yellow

Can you describe a puffin? If you wish to see some, you can make a visit to Lundy.  This is a small island west of Devon. It is less than three miles long and half a mile wide. In 1984 the island, and the sea for a mile round it, was declared the first British marine reserve. Both the island and the sea are full of very interesting wildlife.
The island’s name comes from the Icelandic word lunda, which means puffin. The puffin is a black and white bird with scarlet legs and feet. It has a very big red and yellow striped bill. Puffins nest on the tall, 400 foot high, cliffs. They feed on fish. In the 1940s there were 7,000 puffins on this tiny island. Today there are less than one hundred! If you are a diver, you can also study the sea-life of the reserve. There are many jellyfish. You must be careful of these because they have long, stinging tentacles.  You will find lots of starfish of different shades and shapes on the seabed. In spite of the strong currents, these can stay fixed to the sea bed by linking together to form a net. They absorb food from the sea. If you are lucky, you may even see an octopus hiding in the rocks!
One of the most interesting animals living on the seabed is the sea cucumber. This name has been given to it because it is the same size and shape as a cucumber. It travels along on tube-like feet which it uses like a Hoover to suck up food.
Crabs are fond of sea cucumbers. When it is attacked by a crab, the sea cucumber will defend itself by spinning a web of long sticky strands like cotton. While the crab is trying to free itself, the cucumber has time to escape. From this, it gets its nickname, the cotton-spinner.
In summer there are sea and helicopter trips to the island from the mainland. As well as the puffins, there are 400 sorts of birds to see, together with deer and a rare breed of sheep.

Alexander the Great

Unstructured words: Asia great money would years

Alexander the Great lived over 2,000 years ago. His father was king of a small Greek state. He was still in his teens when he helped his father to attack other small states.  They then made one bigger, stronger kingdom.
He was only twenty when he became king. He had to defend his kingdom which was being attacked by tribes from the north. He led his army north. The enemy felt safe because they were on the far side of a big river. Alexander made his men fell trees and make rafts under cover of darkness. They crossed the river and pushed back the enemy.
During the next twelve years, he marched his troops all over Asia. He was stronger than all the kings he met. At times, a number of his men objected to being led so far. Most of his men admired him because he was always very brave. He never stayed behind to keep himself safe but always led them. It was not just for this that he was called Great.  He was also very just and wise. He never let his men kill the enemy just for the sake of it.
He planned to unite all the kingdoms of Asia into one, to help trade and transport. He wanted them all to have the same money.  Sadly he did not live to see it happen and soon the states split up. His ideas seem very modern to us! Perhaps that is why we still remember him.

Rats

Unstructured words: brown carried diseases eat each fleas Great Plague people poison ropes something

Which animal do you think is man’s worst enemy? It is not something big, like a shark or a lion, but the common rat. It is very rare to find a place that is not populated by rats.  In the past, they went from place to place on ships. They got into the holds and ate the cargo. As the ships landed, the rats escaped down the gang planks and ropes.
Rats are rodents. They are related to mice but are a lot bigger. As they will eat almost anything, they ruin crops and kill all sorts of small wildlife. They also eat all kinds of rubbish and litter. If they can find no other food, they eat each other! They cannot be starved out. They breed very rapidly. Each year, a female may have five or six litters with up to ten baby rats in each.
Rats also carry diseases. The Great Plague came to England with rats that had escaped from ships. The rats had fleas that carried the disease. It was passed to people who were bitten by the fleas. The Plague is not a problem today, but we are still at risk from the germs that rats carry.
The Plague was carried by Black Rats. These rats are less than 20 ems long and quite thin.  They have very long, black whiskers. There are still some of these in England today, but there are many more Brown Rats. Brown Rats did not arrive until the 1600s. They are much bigger, fatter and stronger than Black Rats.
In the past, men had full-time jobs trapping rats. Today, we most often try to get rid of them with poison. It is a never-ending task as they breed so fast. In fact, it is reported that the number of rats is still rising.
Despite all this, some children and adults choose to breed rats, often the white albino ones. They say that they make very good pets.

Sugar

Unstructured words: energy grows honey machine litres straw sugar weigh

Many of us like a sweet taste to our food and drinks. We most often get this from sugar.  It not only tastes nice, but can be an important food for giving us energy. However, we have all been told that too much sugar can ruin our teeth.
Sugar has been made from sugar cane since 3000 BC. Much of it is still made from cane today. Sugar cane is a sort of tall grass like bamboo. It can only be cultivated in hot, wet places as it needs water almost every day. It grows from 4 m to 6 m tall! Sugar is made from the sap in the tall stem of the plant This is why it needs so much water.
In olden days, sugar cane was harvested by hand. This was a very difficult task in the heat of the sun as the stems are very thick and difficult to cut. It was usually done by black slaves who were taken to America during the slave trade. Today, on the bigger farms, most of it is cut by machine.
Much of the sugar we have today is made from sugar beet. This is a root crop, like carrot or parsnip. It will thrive in much cooler places. It has only been farmed in England on a large scale since 1925. The seeds are planted in the spring. By late summer the roots weigh up to a kilo. A beet will need sixty litres of water to get to this size. In parts of England, the crop has to be irrigated.
Two different machines are needed to harvest sugar beet. The first cuts off the tops of the plants. The next digs up the roots and lifts them onto the back of a lorry. The beet can then be kept in clamps until the farmer wants to sell it. These are big piles of roots protected with straw or plastic sheeting.
Next time you pick up a bag of sugar, look to see if it is made from cane or beet.

How Sugar is Made

Unstructured words: because brown contain eat grains heated icing people suggests syrup white would

Once the cane is harvested, it is taken to a sugar refinery. Here it is cut up and fed into rolling mills. These squeeze out the sap and dissolve it in water. The left-over empty cane is not wasted because it makes a good fuel.  Lime is then added to the liquid to collect all the waste products. These sink to the bottom of the tank.
The liquid is then heated and the tank is spun. A little sugar is added to help the grains to form. As the tank spins, the grains collect on its sides. At this stage the sugar is the dark sort we call demerara. This needs extra refining to make the white granulated sugar we like so much. The liquid that is left is  called molasses. Different sorts of syrup can be made from this. Golden syrup is the most common. Sugar is made from beet in much the same way. At the refinery, the roots are washed and chopped up. Jets of hot water are then played onto them. This softens them and extracts the sugar. This can then undergo the different stages of refining.
If you look at the sugar on the supermarket shelf you will see many different sorts. They are all products of cane or beet. The most common is the white granulated. You can also see caster sugar. This has finer grains and is the best for baking cakes. In icing sugar, the grains have been crushed even smaller. As a contrast, preserving sugar has very big grains that dissolve very slowly. As its name suggests it is the best sugar for making jam.
There are also many shades and sizes of brown sugar. These are often put in coffee, but are also important in cooking. Brown sugar may be better for you. Many people think that white sugar has been over-refined and has less goodness in it.
If you look at the list of ingredients on tins and packets of food, you will see that almost all of them contain sugar. As well as having a sweet taste, sugar helps to preserve things.  Many foods would go bad very quickly if sugar was not added to them. This is why we often have a lot of sugar in our diet, even if we do not sweeten our drinks or eat too many sweets or cakes!

The Moon

Unstructured words: because earth eye light new

The moon is a ball of rock spinning in space.  Its distance from the earth is 380,000 km. It does not give out any light itself but seems to shine because it is reflecting the light of the sun. It takes four weeks to orbit the earth and we only ever see one side of it. Its shape seems to alter as it orbits. This happens as the sun lights up different parts of the side we are looking at.
When the moon is between the sun and the earth the sun is lighting up the other side. We can only see the tiny part we call the new moon. After two weeks, we can see it all and call it a full moon. Then, during the next two weeks, it seems to shrink back until we have the next new moon. This process is the waxing and waning of the moon.
Sometimes, at full moon, the earth gets exactly between the sun and the moon. It blocks out the sun’s light so that it cannot shine on the moon and the moon cannot be seen at all. This is called an eclipse of the moon.
At other times, the moon gets between the sun and the earth. This blocks out all or part of the sun, making an eclipse of the sun.  Eclipses of the sun happen quite often. They cannot always be seen all over the world, or with the naked eye. In fact, it is never safe to look directly at the sun to witness an eclipse as this can harm the eye. It is best to use a piece of smoky glass.
On 10th May 1994, the moon partly blocked the sun during the evening. This eclipse was seen in parts of England. The next time such an eclipse will be seen in England will be in 2012.

Living on the Canals

Unstructured words: because boat castles chimney clean half narrow painted roses school 
The canal boats rented for holidays today look just like the old narrow boats, but are no longer pulled by horses. Inside, there are up-to-date ways of cooking and washing. A holiday on them is very different from the life led by a boat family in the 1800s. At that time, man made his living by carrying cargo, like clay or steel, on his boat.
It was ·a very hard life. The entire family lived on the boat. Unless it was wet, the tiny children spent the day on the roof. They had a thick string tying them to the chimney, to stop them falling off the boat! The older children spent the day helping at the locks or with the horses. It was very rare for them to go to school, because they never stayed in one place for any length of time.
Most of the space in the boat was needed for the cargo so the cabin was very cramped. It was only three metres long and a little over two metres wide. The roof was only 2.2 metres from the floor! At the far end of the cabin was a big bed. There was also a small bed that served as a sitting space during the day. On the left was a cooking range with a big brass drying rod hanging over it. Every tiny space was needed for stacking things away. It is hard for us to understand what it felt like to live in such a tiny room all the time.
The women had to keep the tiny cabin very clean and tidy. They often trimmed it with lace mats, horse brasses and pottery. Even the cans used for holding water and the mops used for washing the deck were painted, often with roses or castles. You can get a modem copy of these pots, cans and mops if you visit the shop at a canal museum.
The horses were always very well cared for and well fed, because the men’s jobs depended on them having fit horses. As they often needed to be shod, there were forges at most of the stopping places along the canal.  They were fed from tin dishes which also had roses painted on them. Horse brasses hung from their harnesses.
Modem holiday boats are the same size but have much more space inside because they do not carry any cargo. Even so, they can still seem very cramped if it is too wet or cold to be on deck during the daytime. Do you fancy a canal holiday?

Bridges

Unstructured words: first they their concrete how loads

The first bridges were made from the trunks of trees or from creepers fixed to the banks of a river. Such bridges did not take long to make and saved men a lot of time as they hunted for food.
As man’s need for transport developed, bridges needed to be much stronger and more permanent. The Romans made wide, arched river bridges using wedge-shaped bricks.
These arched bridges were very strong. They enabled large loads to be transported over the river. Hundreds of armed men and all their equipment needed to cross them very quickly as the Roman troops advanced. The Romans also constructed big bridges to carry water to their camps. These are called aqueducts (aqua means water in Latin), and some of them can still be seen today.
In the 1800s bridges were often made so wide that they had shops on both sides. You can still see a bridge like this if you visit Bath.  Later, bridges were often made with steel struts like the Forth Bridge in Scotland.  Others were hung from wires like that at Clifton in Bristol.
Today, bridges are often made of concrete. There are two very long bridges in England.  One is the Humber Bridge which links Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. Another was opened in 1996 and crosses the River Severn, linking England and Wales. A much longer bridge has also been constructed in Denmark.  This will link two of their islands, which are twenty miles apart. The bridge will be supported on land on a tiny island in between them.
Next time you travel a long way, study the bridges you go over or under. Look to see what they are made of and if they are old or modern.

Canada

Unstructured words: around Asia Bering Strait boat circle country culture diseases east Europeans grew hockey mountains out spread Superior world

Canada is the second biggest country in the world. It is over 9,000,000 square km in size.  The frozen north extends far into the Arctic Circle. Other parts are much warmer in the summer but still have very cold winters. Canada has the biggest freshwater lake in the world. It is called Lake Superior and is four times as big as Wales.
Canada also has three big mountain ranges. The best known range is in the west of the country.  It is called the Rocky Mountains. The Niagara Falls, where the water falls a distance of 51 metres, are also in Canada.
There are several different races living in Canada today. The first Canadian immigrants probably crossed the land bridge over the Bering Strait from Asia to Alaska some 20,000 to 30,000 years ago. From these people have come the Eskimo and Indian tribes.
The Eskimos, or Inuits, live in the far north.  They spend their time hunting and fishing. They used to live in igloos but today most of them live in more modern houses. Their diet still consists mainly of fish and seal meat.
The Indians spread out over much of Canada.  The plains Indians usually lived in tents, called tepees. This enabled them to move around with the buffalo herds on which they depended. The Indian tribes in the far west became fishermen.  Those in the forests became hunters. The tribes that settled in the east grew crops. Each tribe developed its own culture, with its 9wn rituals and dances, but they all lived in harmony with nature.
This ended with the arrival of the first English and French explorers in the 1400s. By the 1600s France and England ·had claimed vast areas of Canada for themselves. Many Indians died from diseases, like the common cold, which were brought in by the Europeans.
Today Canada is a very modern country. Its economy is based upon fishing, farming, forestry and mining. It is not surprising that most Canadians are of French or English stock. In most places, such as the capital, Ottawa, both English and French are spoken but in the east, in Quebec, only French is used.
Many holiday makers go to Canada to admire the wild-life or visit the many interesting sites.  Some go to ski in the mountains. They can also take part in other sports such as ice-hockey, football, and baseball. These sports are all very common in Canada. You can visit such a big country many times and always find something fresh to see and do.

Chocolate

Unstructured words: cocoa caffeine eat headache mouth people yearly

How much chocolate do you eat? Most of us like to be given a box of chocolates as a present,” or to go to the shop to get a chocolate bar for a snack. Chocolate is made from cocoa butter. This is a paste which is made from the cocoa bean.
Why do we like chocolate so much? There are many substances in cocoa butter that affect us. One of them, caffeine, is the same stimulant that is in coffee. This makes us wakeful and lively. In parts of South America, where cocoa trees were planted as a crop, sweetened cocoa butter was often given to a sentry to keep him awake and alert.
Another of the substances in cocoa is related to some of the drugs that are used to make us feel happy and contented. 
It is not only the taste that affects us. Cocoa butter melts at 34° C so it will melt in the mouth. This melting is so sudden that it gives a feeling of coolness. Most of us like this very much. It is unlike the feeling we get from eating anything else.
Chocolate was often used for drinking in England from the 1800s. Not until 184 7 was
eating chocolate produced in Bristol,. by Fry and Sons. Britons now consume an average of 10 kilos per person each year! This is second only to the Swiss who make some of the finest chocolates there are.
Eating all this chocolate can have a bad effect upon us. · Dentists tell us that too much chocolate is bad for the teeth as it is sweet and sticky. It is also very fattening. Some people may even suffer from headaches after eating it.
There is an even bigger danger in eating too much chocolate. A study just published said that chocolate is the food that is most craved.  It can make a person into a chocoholic. This is the name for a person who is addicted to it. Chocoholics often get very depressed if they try to give it up or eat less. Remember this next time you pick up a chocolate!

Lake and River Fishing 1. What You Need

Unstructured words: allow bait bread catch fibres nylon teach

Do you ever go fishing? It is a very common pastime today. It is a hobby that can give the angler the thrill of landing a prize fish.  Angling can also teach us a lot about nature and wildlife.
There is a vast array of angling equipment in the shops. If you are a beginner you will need a rod which splits into three lengths. This must be fitted with a reel of strong line, on which you will need a hook and float. Lastly you will want a keep net and some bait.
Most modem rods are made of glass or carbon fibres and have nylon lines. Before you start fishing, it is important to check that the line is fitted on the reel correctly. A badly-fitted reel spool can make it very hard to cast the line.
The float has two uses. The most important one is to indicate that a fish has taken the bait. Its second use is to allow you to present the bait to the fish at different levels and in different ways. This is. done by changing the size and shape of the float.
There are many sizes of hooks. These are all numbered. The smaller the number the bigger the hook! Hooks used to have sharp barbs on the end to stick into the flesh of the fish’s mouth. However most modem anglers prefer to use barbless hooks. These do less harm to the fish.
Bait is fixed to the hook to attract fish to it.  Commonly used baits include maggots, bread and cheese. If you want to catch a pike, small herring or sprats can be used as bait. The best nets are big with a flat bottom. They are sunk in the water before fishing begins.  They are used to keep the fish alive and safe until the end of the day.

Lake and River Fishing 2. What To Do

Unstructured words: flows

Before you can hope to fill your keep net, you must master the skill of casting. This takes time because the rod must be swung very smoothly. A common method of casting is the overarm cast. You must take care when using this method because it is easy to get the line trapped in trees or wires!
Where you go to fish will depend on what you want to catch. Almost all rivers, unless they are very badly polluted, will have some fish. In the upper reaches of a river, the current flows too quickly for most fish. In water that flows less fast, you can find many fish such as bream, dace or chub. Bream prefer the deeper parts of the river but dace tend to keep away from deep water. Chub like the shade of overhanging branches.
Lakes and ponds are also very good fishing sites. Lakes that are too small to be used for water sports are often very easy to fish.  Before beginning, you should study the lake side. Look at the plants that are there and see if the bottom is gravel or mud. This · will help you to find the right place to try for the fish that you want.
Perch like shelter and will often be hidden between tree roots. Perch like a gravel bottom with a little silt over it. Pike and carp will often hide tinder lily pads. If fishing there, you must be careful not to get the line trapped in the stems of the plants.
If you are after very big fish, perhaps the best sites of all are old gravel pits. Most of the prize fish have been taken in these. Many of them are very deep so you need to take extra care when fishing in them. It is better not to go fishing in a gravel pit if you are alone.
Many fishermen are so keen that they will sit all day under a green umbrella even if no fish are biting. It is not a hobby for a person who gets bored quickly!

British Snakes 1

There are only three different snakes that live in the British Isles. The two most often seen are the grass snake and the adder or viper.  The biggest is the grass snake which is more than a metre in length. Its diet consists of frogs, fish, mice and small birds. The grass snake is quite harmless to humans. It is as much at home in ·the water as on land and thrives in many different habitats.
In summer the female lays a long string of up to forty eggs. She prefers a warm place such as a compost heap. Six weeks later, the eggs hatch. The baby snakes have an egg tooth on the top of their heads. They use this to break the thick shell. It then drops off.
The adder is much shorter. The male is smaller and more vivid than the female. It is the commonest British snake but is seldom seen as it is very shy. It has a V-shaped marking on its head. Adders eat many small mammals. They breed differently from the grass snake. The female keeps the eggs inside her until they hatch and are born as live baby adders. There can be as many as twenty in a brood.
You are most likely to see an adder sunning itself in a sandy patch on a common, or by the side of a path. If you are very lucky, you may spot two males in the mating season, performing the dance of the adders. They lift themselves up and twine around each other. Each attempts to push the other aside.  The dance is very graceful and may last for a long time.
You must be careful of these snakes, although an adder will not attack unless it thinks it is in danger. If you are barefoot, or have sandals on, and tread on an adder, it can easily bite your toe. This bite is harmful and, in rare cases, has been deadly.

British Snakes 2

Unstructured words: eyesight grow none out tail their prey year

The third British snake, the smooth snake, is quite rare. It lives on heaths, wooded hillsides or stony waste land. It gets its name from the smoothness of its skin. There are no spikes on the scales on its back as there are on the grass snake and adder.
It is not much bigger than the adder but is much longer and thinner. Its head is also less distinct from its body. Lizards are its preferred food, but it will also eat mice and voles. As with adders, the eggs hatch inside the females. There are not often more than six baby snakes born at one time.
Snakes do not usually have very good eyesight. Instead they rely on their other senses. They have a good sense of smell and taste the air by flicking out their tongues.  They also feel vibrations through the scales on the underside of their bodies. Once they get near to their prey they use heat sensors in their cheeks to detect its exact position.
Their skull bones are very loosely connected at the jaw. They can be dislocated to allow them to eat food three or four times the size of their heads. Their teeth slope backwards, making it very difficult for living prey to escape.
Snakes’ skins cannot increase in size so they have to shed their skins as they grow. A baby snake may shed its skin as many as five times a year. The skin splits at the head. The snake then rubs itself on rocks or a thorny bush to loosen it. In the end the snake can slip free, leaving the old skin inside out.
If you try to capture a grass snake or a smooth snake, it will try to deter you by giving off a nasty smell! Once taken, both sorts will adapt to captivity and are often kept as pets.  Adders do not make good pets. When kept in a cage they will often go on hunger strike and die.
If you are interested in these snakes, one of the best places to go is Studland Bay Heath Reserve in Dorset. All three sorts live there, together with the smooth snake’s preferred food, the very rare sand lizard.

The Toad Patrols

Unstructured words: toad road they their watch councils ground about

Have you ever seen a picture of a toad at the roadside? If so, it will have been erected to warn drivers about a toad crossing place.
During the winter, toads hibernate. They choose sheltered places such as under hedges or in rabbit holes. In March or April they wake up and start to migrate to find water so that they can breed. 
Like frogs, they have to lay their eggs in water. There are many more males than females. As soon as a male is awake, he will look for a female, jump on her back and make her carry him to a pond!
They will travel in a direct line, mostly after dark. This means that they will often have to cross roads full of fast traffic. They do not have much road sense so, each Spring,  many are killed. In places, toads can be so thick on the ground that you cannot help stepping on them!
At many likely sites British Toad Patrols have been set up. In 1984, there were 60 listed sites. In 1994 there were 500. Local naturalists meet at the sites. Here they help the toads to cross the road. In places, the local councils have made toad tunnels under “ the road. Sadly, the toads will not always use them. Some councils have put small fences along the road at the crossing places.  The toads gather behind these fences and members of the Toad Patrols pick them up and carry them safely across.
It has been said that only the British care so much for animals that they will go to the roadsides after dark to carry buckets of toads across the road!

Kite Flying

Unstructured words: aerial key lightning

Do you like flying kites? This pastime is about 2,500 years old. It is said to have started when a farmer in China fixed a length of string to his hat. The first kite went up and away! Today there is a lot more to flying kites than just standing still, holding the end of a string. Every year hundreds of keen kite flyers enter contests. They are judged on both formation flying and kite control in all kinds of wind.
The most thrilling kites are the Top Gun kites.  These have a lot of lift. They make you feel as if the kite is trying to pull you off the ground. Four of these fixed together will lift a man. They may bring him back to land as far as fifty feet from where he started.
Man-lifting kites have been around for a long time. In the 1840s, they were used to lift men from sinking ships. During the 1914-1918 war, man-lifting kites were sent up to observe enemy lines. At one time the British army had a Kite Unit. In the 1939-1945 war, airmen were given kites in case they crash-landed in the sea. An aerial was fixed to the kite. They sent this up to radio for help.
In 1752, Benjamin Franklin used a kite to prove that lightning is made by an electric current. He sent a kite up into the clouds during a thunder storm. He put a metal key on the end of the string. Lightning struck the kite. It ran along the wet string and the key sparked. He had proved that his idea was correct. Can you think of a way in which this theory is still used today?

Pond Life

Unstructured words: draw light spawn surface

Do you live near a pond? If so, you may have been pond dipping to find some of the things that live in it. This is most fun if you take a book to help you identify the creatures that you find. You may prefer to take a pad and pencil and try to draw a picture of them.  Then you can compare your pictures with a book at home.
In Spring one of the most common things to be seen is jelly with black spots in it. This is the eggs, or spawn, of frogs or toads. If the jelly is in a mass, the eggs belong to frogs. If it is in a long string, they are toads’ eggs. In summer these will become tadpoles, which are very small with a body and tail. If you find them later still, the tails will have gone and legs will have developed. Eventually they will become tiny frogs or toads.
If you see a silky bell-shape between two weeds, you will have found the nest of a water spider. The female spins a flat sheet of silk. She fixes this to the weeds and then collects many bubbles of air. She releases these under the sheet and, as they rise, they push the sheet up into a bell-shape. This is where she lives and lays her eggs.
You may be puzzled by an insect that seems to be walking on top of the water. It has long legs and a hairy coat. This is a pond skater or a water measurer. These cannot fly or swim but are so light that they do not sink.  They are supported by a fine film on top of the water called the surface film.
You may see water snails hanging upside down. These resemble land snails. They make a layer of slime just under the surface of the water and then stick to it. Water boatmen also cling upside down to the surface film _when they need a rest. They look a bit like beetles but they can fly. They swim by using their back pair of legs like oars.
These are only some of the interesting things that live in ponds. Have you seen any of them?

Printing

Unusual and Unstructured words: copies first German Gutenberg how

Have you ever used a printing set? It usually comes with many small plastic letters that are fitted into wooden blocks. A print is made by pressing the letters onto an inked pad and then onto paper. Before this way of printing was invented, all books had to be scribed by hand. All the pictures had to be painted by hand as well. Think how long it must have taken to finish even one copy of a small book! Books cost so much to make that only the very rich were able to afford them.
This all changed in 1456 when a German called Gutenberg had the idea of cutting letters on small blocks of metal. These were slotted into a frame to make up the text of a whole page. The frame was then inked and used to print the text. Once the frame was made, it was possible to print lots of copies very quickly.
Twenty years later a man named Caxton set up a printing press in England. He made the first book ever to be printed in English.  From then until a few years ago, all printing of books and papers was done in this way.  Consequently books became much cheaper and more and more common. Today most of us can afford the price of a book if we want one.
Within the last twenty years, the method of printing has changed again. This is due to the development of the computer. Now a screen full of text can be printed in seconds.  The age of desk-top publishing has arrived!  Do you think this will make books and papers even cheaper? 

Deserts

Unstructured words: litres rain wear

A desert is a place where rain hardly ever falls and not many plants can live. One fifth of all the land on this planet is desert. The biggest, the Sahara Desert, is almost as large as the United States of America. It consists of rocks and huge sand dunes. These dunes are constantly moved from place to place by strong winds.
The cactus is one plant that has adapted to the desert. Its sharp spines trap a layer of still air. This keeps the drying winds away from the thick, fleshy stem in which it stores water.
Camels can also live in the desert. They store water in their humps. They often drink 140 litres at one time so that they do not need to drink again for a week. Those who ride them across the desert do not need to carry drink for them. This makes them very useful as pack animals. A string of camels crossing the desert is called a caravan.
The tribes who live in the Sahara move from place to place looking for food. They are called nomads. They eat game, plants and insects. They often live in tents which they can pack up quickly. They wear long robes and bind cloths over their faces and hair.  These protect them from the dust and heat during the day and from the cold at night.

Rabbits

Unstructured words: burrow brought survived year

Have you ever had a rabbit as a pet? Many of us think of them as soft, cuddly creatures but to farmers they are terrible pests. The crops they eat cost farmers £30,000,000 each year.
Rabbits are not native to England. They were brought in by the Normans after the Battle of Hastings ·in 1 066. For 600 years they did not live in the wild but were bred for meat and for their skins. They were kept in enclosed warrens and were looked after by a warrener. When he needed to catch rabbits, he used ferrets. All the exits from the burrows were covered with pegged nets and a ferret was let loose into the burrow. As the rabbits smelled the ferret, they rushed to escape. They got tangled in the nets and were then killed by the warrener.
By the 1600s rabbits had escaped into the wild and had spread rapidly. Not until the 1950s were their numbers checked when a terrible disease wiped out almost all of them.  It was called myxomatosis and was spread by rabbit fleas. Those rabbits that survived went on breeding. Today there are almost as many as there were before the disease.
This rise in population has happened because a female can have six litters a year. She may have six or more little ones in each litter. January is the mating season when a buck might travel for miles in his attempts to find a mate. Only the females dig burrows so, if he cannot find one, he has to live above ground. Here he becomes a sitting target for foxes, buzzards and the other carnivores that think that rabbit makes a tasty meal. He also risks dying from the cold.
Bad weather is the biggest natural enemy of rabbits. Half of them may not survive a long hard winter. If the grass is frozen or covered by snow, they will try to live by eating the bark of trees. This often kills the trees. This is another reason why rabbits are called pests.
Farmers shoot rabbits and still use ferrets to try to check their numbers. They are killed as humanely as possible, Many more of us are eating rabbit meat these days. Perhaps the farmers will soon make up some of the money they have lost. They will be able to sell rabbit meat to butchers and supermarkets.  Will you eat it?

Tower Bridge

Unstructured words: allow engine tower year

On June 30th, 1994, London celebrated the centenary of Tower Bridge. In the 1890s the east of London was rapidly expanding. The old London Bridge was too small to take all the road traffic. At the same time bigger and bigger ships were using the river.
To solve the problem, John Wolf Barry and Sir Horace Jones were asked to make a bridge that opened. The flaps that open are called the bascules. It had to have a central span of at least 197 feet. Its clearance had to be at least 131 feet to allow the largest ships to go into the Port of London.
The two big Gothic towers are only for decoration. The real strength of the bridge is in the steel frame inside them. The towers also had lifts in them. These took foot passengers to the footbridge along the top.  Until 1974 huge steam engines in the towers were used to lift the bascules. Since then, the bridge has been lifted electrically.
The road bridge was intended only to carry horses and carts. It is a good job that it was made very strong. Today, 40,000 vehicles use it every day. You can often see a 17 ton lorry crossing ·it! It is still opened at least 500 times a year. Until 1962 it was always opened when a ship came by with a ball’ in its rigging. This indicated that the ship was too tall to pass unless the bascules were lifted. Today each ship has to give a day’s notice that it is coming.
The old engines have been preserved and are in a museum in the towers. Try to visit it next time you are in London. You can play with the models there. These will help you to understand the way the bridge was made and operated. After this, you can stroll along the top and see the river and all the city spread beneath you!

Iceland

Unstructured words: although because circle country greenhouses hours people resource town

Although the island of Iceland is only three hours away from us by plane, not many of us choose to go there for a holiday. This is a pity because it is unlike any other place within easy reach of us. Parts of it are in the Arctic Circle. In spite of this, it never gets really cold. Westerly winds and the Gulf Stream keep it warm, but gales and storms are frequent. In summer, it hardly gets dark at all. 
It has been called the “Land of Frost and Fire” because it has been formed by these two elements. There are large glaciers over a tenth of the land and yet there is still a lot of volcanic activity in Iceland. In 1973 a volcano crushed a complete town. High temperatures under the earth heat hundreds of hot springs. Iceland has more of these hot springs than · any other country. In places, huge jets of water called “geysers” shoot up into the air. The biggest of these can go up to 70 m.
The Icelanders have a very high standard of living. They get much of their heating free by using the hot water from the springs for heating homes and greenhouses. The market gardeners can cultivate all sorts of crops which do not normally thrive so far north, even things like bananas!
The most important industry is fishing. The sea is rich in cod and herring, much of which is exported. Sheep are the next most , important resource. There are many more sheep than people in Iceland. In the summer they graze the hill tops, but in the winter they have to be taken in to shelter. Fish and lamb make up much of the Icelandic diet. Even their “beef burgers” are made from lamb!
Until recently the other important animal was the little Icelandic horse. It is very strong for its size and used to · be the main form of transport. Nowadays it is still used but mainly for sport, such as pony trekking.  Other common sports are swimming and basketball.
Do you fancy a holiday in Iceland?

The Firefly

Unstructured word: light

Have you ever been walking in the dark in June or July and noticed tiny greenish lights that look like sparks? These will probably come from a firefly. The fly has two separate substances in its body. When these are mixed together in the air, they react to produce the glowing green light.
The male does this as it attempts to attract a mate. It is one of the brightest lights to be found in nature. Even so, it takes 400 of them to give the same light as one candle. If the female is interested, she will respond with a different pattern of flashing. The male will then go to find her. There are many different sorts of fireflies. Each has a different pattern of light. In one species that is common in England, the male’s flash is seen every five seconds and the female responds exactly two seconds later.
Sometimes the male’s attempts to find a mate can end in disaster. One of the larger female fireflies feeds on smaller ones. She will copy the smaller female’s pattern of flashing. This attracts a male to her hiding place, where she will then kill him and eat him! Apart from this, the only real enemy of the firefly is he spider which will often trap them in its webs.  When a male is stuck in the web, it will still go on flashing, so· the crafty spider does not eat it at once. She leaves it to attract more females to the web! However, birds will not eat them as they have a very nasty taste.
Fireflies are not the only things in nature that are able to make light. Many undersea creatures give off bright blue light. On one TV programme, a modem underwater camera displayed some fantastic pictures. A starfish was shining to blind a crab that was attacking it. It seems that 90% of things living on the dark seabed can emit light. You are not likely ever to see these, except on film, but you may well see a firefly in woods or lanes away from the bright lights of our towns and cities.

Tigers

Unstructured words: again

Tigers are the biggest members of the cat family. They live in the jungles of India and Asia. Most of them are orange with thick, black stripes. Sometimes, in a zoo, you may see a very rare white tiger.
Tigers are meat-eaters. The stripes help them to hide in the tall grass of the jungle as they creep up on the deer, wild pigs or buffalo that they are. hunting. They can move very quietly on big, softly-padded feet. Adult tigers live alone, only meeting to mate. A female, or tigress, has three or four cubs. These stay with her for two years before going off to live by themselves.
The tiger is one of the most hunted animals in history. From Victorian times, British hunters used to go on tiger shoots. Many of them were proud to have tiger-skin rugs on their floors. In 1900 there were about 100,000 tigers in Asia but, by 1970, there were only 5,000 left. Tiger hunting was then banned.
In 1973 Project Tiger was set up to create tiger reserves in India. Their numbers then began to increase. Sadly these big hunters are being hunted again, this time, illegally, for their bones. The hunters grind the bones and sell them as medicine all over the Far East. Soon there may be no tigers left.

Thunderstorms

Unstructured words: clouds hear sounds

Do you like thunderstorms? They frighten many people. Some people even hide under the table or the bedclothes in a storm. Others find them very exciting. Primitive man said that the spirits of the sky were angry when there was a storm. Later, men said that thunder came from gases exploding in the clouds.
Today we know the truth. The flashes of lightning are static electricity. This is made when drops of water in the clouds move very quickly. The result is a huge difference in voltage between the top and the bottom of the cloud, or the cloud and the earth. This discharges and makes the flash. Lightning gives off heat. This makes the air expand with the crashing sound we call a clap of thunder.
Light travels faster than sound so that we see the flash before we hear the thunder. The longer the gap is between them, the further away is the storm. You can estimate that it is a mile away for every second difference.
Bad storms can do a lot of damage. If trees are struck by lightning, they often fall over.  Lightning striking electricity cables can disrupt the supply putting huge areas into darkness for a long time. If a person is Struck, he may be killed. In tropical places such storms are very common.. Luckily, here, they are quite rare.

Flying

Unstructured words: about air flew further years

There is an old Greek legend about a man called learns, who longed to fly. He made wings from feathers held together with wax and flew up towards the sun. The wax melted and he fell to the ground and was killed. This example of man’s wish to fly is only one of many attempts made over the years. Not until the internal combustion engine was invented did human flight become possible.
In 1900, in America, the Wright brothers began to make and fly gliders. In 1903 they adapted the internal combustion engine and fitted it to a bi-plane. Two years later it flew for the first time. This first flight only lasted twelve seconds, but by 1908, they had kept a plane in the air for over an hour. Just a year later, a Frenchman, Bleriot, crossed the Channel by plane.
In the 1914-18 war, it became important to develop the plane quickly. This was because planes gave a big advantage when attacking the enemy. After the war, more and more complex planes and engines were developed.  Soon passenger services were introduced.
The next development began in the 1930s when a man called Frank Whittle perfected the jet engine. This works like a rocket. Air is sucked into the front of the engine and burned with oil. The · gas that is formed inside expands. It rushes out of the back of the engine as a jet. The plane is pushed forward by the force. During the 1939-45 war, the British Government developed this concept further. By the end of the war, fighter pilots were flying at very high speeds in jet planes.
Nowadays, flying is a common way to travel and is also a hobby. Those who can afford to may fly a small plane in their spare time.  Others prefer a more modem air sport such as flying a micro-light, or even hang-gliding.  Modern man has perfected the dream of learns!

The Steam Engine

Unstructured words: previously

Have you ever been to a preserved railway?  Did you ride behind ·a steam engine? The idea for such an engine came from a Scotsman called James Watt. One day, in 1763, he began to mend a model engine. This engine was used to pump water out of coal mines. These engines could drive a shaft backwards and forwards. This made them very good ·for pumping but they were not much use for anything else.
As he mended it, he decided to try to invent a better one. He made many attempts until at last he succeeded in making a full-size engine that worked well. It produced more energy than the old one and also used less fuel. It sold very well but his next invention was even better. In 1781, he patented an engine that was able to drive a wheel.
This meant that it was possible to use steam to drive anything with wheels. The idea was quickly put to good use. Steam engines were used in factories for much of the heavy work that had previously been done by hand.  Soon, the old sailing ships were replaced by paddle steamers. Safer, faster steam trains took over from horse-drawn stage coaches.  Before long, these were also carrying most of the nation’s goods traffic so the old canals also fell into disuse. The Age of Steam had begun!
Today steam engines have themselves been replaced. They only remain where they have been preserved. More and more of us like to visit these old railways and see the engines repainted and restored to their former glory.

Wind Power

Unstructured words: caused Egypt first sailors turns

Wind is caused when warm air rises and cold air rushes in to take its place. 6,000 years ago, sailors in Egypt found out that wind could blow their ships along. By 800 AD windmills were being used in the Middle East.
The first windmill in England was constructed in 1187 to make flour from corn. There are different shapes of mills, but the most common is the tower mill. The huge sails are directed into the wind by a fantail at the back. The force of the wind then turns a round stone inside the tower. The corn is ground between this stone and one beneath it until it is the fine powder we call flour.  Several of these old mills have been restored.  You can visit them today and get stone-ground flour from them. Is there one near you?
Wind power can also be used to make electricity. This is fairly rare in Britain. In Denmark and California, they hoped to produce 1 0% of their needs from windmills by the year 2000. It is a very green way of producing power because it does not create any fumes or acid rain.
Sadly, it can only be used in windy areas and in places where there is plenty of space. To give large amounts of power, thousands of huge windmills about 30m in diameter would be needed. These are often used in the windy, empty areas of Britain, although in a storm, they can be badly damaged.

Pandas

Unstructured words: bears fur hear know search

Did you know that there are two sorts of panda? We do not often hear about the red, or lesser, panda. This is about the size of a cat with a long tail. It comes out at night and uses its strong, sharp claws to clamber up trees in search of food.
However, we can all recognise the black and white giant panda. It can grow to 1.5 m high and tips the scales at 160 kg. Pandas live in high mountain forests in isolated parts of China. These days they are protected because they are very rare. There may be as few as 1,000 alive today.
A giant panda’s main food is bamboo. This is a sort of grass which grows about 3m high.  Bamboo stems are as thick as a finger and as hard as wood, so-pandas eat the new shoots.  They spend up to 16 hours a day crunching as they need to eat about 600 of these shoots every day. If they cannot find enough bamboo, they have to eat other plants or even small mammals instead.
Giant pandas live alone in a small territory of bamboo forest and only meet to mate.  Females have only one cub at a time. The cub is about the size of a hamster at birth. It is pink with thin hair and has no black markings. After six months it is ready to leave the ·mother and live alone. Recently many attempts have been made to breed pandas in captivity. Only 8 have ever been born in zoos outside China.
The greatest threat to giant pandas is starvation. This may happen when the bamboo crop fails or is chopped down to make room for men to grow crops. There are now five panda reserves in China where chopping down the forest is forbidden.  Another threat comes from wild dogs or bears. These are always ready to attack and kill them for food. It is quite possible that the panda will die out in spite of all man’s efforts to save it.

Hair

Unstructured words: fashion style

Human hair grows more than 1 cm a month.  If it is left uncut, it will reach between 60 and 90 ems. The longest hair in the world is that of a lady in North India. Her hair is over 6 m long! The hair that you can see is quite dead and grows out of a tiny pit in the skin called a follicle.
Hair has always been as important a fashion item as clothes. Until the 1920s, women generally had long hair. In Roman times, they had such complicated hair-styles that they needed two or three slaves to get it into the correct shape. The dark-haired Romans also sometimes wore blonde wigs. These were made from the hair that they had cut off captured slaves!
Queen Elizabeth I also had to wear a wig.  This was because all her hair fell out and she went bald. She only used to wash her hair about three times a year. She used a mixture of wood ash and water as a shampoo. This was quite common in her day.
During the 18th century, both men and women wore wigs. These were usually covered with white powder. This was such a messy job that some houses had small rooms called powder rooms where it was done. The styles were very elaborate. One style that was often used, had a model ship in full sail on top. This was used to celebrate a victory at sea. These wigs cost so much that they were only changed every two or three weeks. It was quite c0mmon for nests of bugs and even mice to live in them!
Today, our judges still have white wigs very like those of the 18th century. Most hair styles now are simpler but can still be quite costly. They are often copied from pop stars or sportsmen or are sometimes intended to shock by the shade or cut. Skinheads choose to look bald by shaving off all their hair.
Real baldness is still a problem as it is inherited and there are no lasting cures. If you could invent one, you would make a fortune!

Hovercraft

Unstructured words: cushion inventor

In 1954, an English inventor was working with tin cans, a set of scales and a sort of huge hair dryer. This rather odd equipment gave him the idea for the modern Hovercraft.
Hovercraft provide one of the most flexible methods of travel. They are able to drive over mud, rocks and even the sea. When a Hovercraft is moving, the bottom does not make contact with the land or sea beneath it but floats on a cushion of air.
All round the bottom of the Hovercraft is a rubber skirt. This traps air which is forced under the craft by huge fans. The force of this air lifts up the Hovercraft, and large propellers on the deck push it forward. The Hovercraft can be steered either by fins, which act like rudders on a ship, or by moving the propellers.
Since the first trip was made in 1959, these craft have become a very important form of transport. The largest Hovercraft can carry 400 passengers and 55 cars at up to 50 mph.  It can travel much faster than the ferries.  Unlike a boat, it does not have to push against the force of the waves.
Trials are now being made with hover trains. They float over the rails, held up by very strong magnets, and make no contact at all with the tracks beneath them.

Robots

Unstructured words: Australia machine people Russia touch

A robot is an intelligent machine with a computer brain. It can be programmed to perform human tasks by itself. Unlike those in films, most real robots do not look at all human and can usually only do one job each.
The original robot was produced in the USA in 1954. In the 1960s robots began to be used alongside humans. First a human has to teach the robot its task. The computer brain then remembers the task and will repeat it time after time until told to do something else.
A robot is very fast and accurate and does not need to stop to sleep or eat. It does not need wages or holidays and never goes on strike! However, if the man who programs it makes a mistake, things can go very wrong.  In one car factory using robots, 1500 cars had the doors welded shut! This was due to a mistake in the programming.
Robots are most useful ·where the job is risky, such as in dealing · with very hot metals or with radio-active substances. They are now in use almost everywhere. In Australia, a sheep-shearing robot can completely remove a fleece in 15 seconds. In Russia, in one coalmine, all the coal-cutting is done by robots.
More recent robots have much better brains.  They have senses and can respond to what they see and touch. Some can also understand what is said to them. These are now used a lot in space travel as· well as in gadgets to help the disabled.
A robot can replace the jobs of ten or more humans. Many people are afraid that this might mean that they have less chance of getting a job. Others think that it will give managers the chance to pay better wages to the workforce. What do you think?

Skirts

Unstructured words: group thought

The first skirts were probably worn to protect people’s legs from insects. They were made of dangling ornaments tied to a waistband.  Later they were made of cloth and worn by both men and women. This can be seen in very old wall paintings..
In Crete, in 2000 BC, men wore a kind of pleated skirt that kept their legs free for sport.  It was like the modem kilt. This is the only skirt commonly worn today by British men.
The kilt is made from a cloth called tartan and is worn by some Scots. Each clan, or family group, has its own pattern of checks or stripes woven into the cloth. ‘ The shape of ladies’ skirts is always changing. In the· 18th century basket skirts were worn: These were made of two wicker frames tied to each side of the waist. The skirt was worn over the top. Later came the bustle. This was a sort of padded frame. It was tied to the waist and worn under the back of the skirt. The bustle was made of wood, steel or bone ·and was worn with a tight corset. Much prettier was the crinoline.  This was made from huge hoops worn under the skirt. If you wore one of these, it was not a{ all easy” to move in a crowd.
In this century, it is the length of the skirt that has changed most frequently. In the 1920s, the normal ankle length skirts became much shorter. The older generation at that time thought that these were very- shocking.  Forty years later, those who had worn the short skirts of the 1920s were themselves shocked. The young girls of the 60s walked about in mini-skirts. Do you think their legs were bitten by insects?

Fossils

Unstructured words: dinosaur enough years

For thousands of years men were puzzled by the strangely-shaped patterns that were often seen in lumps of rock. Only in the last 200 years have we come to understand that these are the. fossils of the fish, insects and animals that lived in prehistoric times. Many of them lived in or near water.
When an animal dies, its softer parts decay and only the bones, teeth or shell are left. If mud settles round these, they· may be preserved as the mud slowly hardens to rock.
Even if the shells or bones themselves later dissolve away, the pattern will still remain in the rock. This happens when minerals leach into the holes and harden, taking on the original shape of the creature.  Sometimes even the soft parts of delicate plants or leaves are fossilised. These help us to find out what sort of vegetation was growing. at the time.
In prehistoric times, giant reptiles lived by rivers or swamps. When they died, their bodies sometimes sank into the mud and became fossilised. The fossils of many different dinosaurs have been found. These help us to understand more about these huge creatures that seem so strange to us.  Sometimes the dinosaur’s footprints were baked hard by the sun. Then sand or mud washed over them preserving the footprints.  A. set of these was found on a beach in Dorset and can now be seen in the British Museum.
Fossil hunting is quite a common hobby.  Next time you visit a rocky stretch of beach, look at the cliffs and pebbles carefully. You are unlikely to be lucky enough to find a set of dinosaur’s footprints, but you may find some small fossils that will help you to begin an interesting collection:

Hadrian’s Wall

Unstructured Word: built ·

Have you ever visited Hadrian’s Wall? It was constructed in the north of England by the Romans after the Roman Emperor, Hadrian, had visited Britain in 122 AD. It was planned as a defence to keep out the warlike tribes from the north. In places, it is ten feet thick and twenty feet high and stretches for 73 miles. It was completed in only six years.
Seventeen huge forts were built along its length and every Roman mile was marked by a mile castle. Spaced out between each mile castle were two signal towers. From these, sentries could observe the whole area.
To make it even safer, the Romans dug a deep ditch in front of the wall. This made it difficult for the enemy to come close enough to attack. At times as many as 5,000 cavalry and 13,000 infantry were stationed along the wall.
To keep so many men in such an isolated spot, the Romans had to be very good planners. The leaders were aware that if the men were to fight well, they needed good equipment, plenty of food and good health.  Granaries were built to store grain. The remains of their bathrooms and toilets can still be seen today.
After the Romans left Britain in the 4th century, the wall remained standing for many years. However, as time passed, parts of it were broken down. The stones were taken to build homes and churches. Two hundred and fifty years ago, Bonnie Prince Charlie built a new road for his army. This used a good deal of the stone that was left.
However, much of the wall can still be seen today. It is also possible to visit sites that are still being excavated. Here hoards of Roman coins, pottery and other everyday objects are often found. In fact, Hadrian’s Wall is a very interesting place to visit. You can marvel at the skill with which the Romans planned their lives and constructed such a huge line of defence without any modem equipment to help them.

Oil

Irregular word: Exxon Valdez

Do you know what the following products have in common: paint, spectacle frames, washing-up liquid, plastic bags, polish, drainpipes and nylon? They are all made from oil.
Oil is found underground or beneath the seabed. It was formed millions of years ago from the remains of sea animals and plants.  When it comes out of the ground, it is a dark, shiny liquid called crude oil. This needs to  be treated at a huge factory, called an oil refinery, before it can be used.
Crude oil has more uses than almost any other substance. None of it is wasted. It is the basis of hundreds of household goods. It powers industries, cars, ships, trains and planes and helps to heat our homes.
Oil provides almost half the energy used in the world and has made many men and many countries very rich. In 1990, Britain alone took 91,000,000 tons from beneath the North Sea. Oil-based fuels are easy to transport and store. They burn well to give energy, but they give off gases which pollute the. air we breathe.
Another problem is the risk of spillage while the oil is being transported by tanker. In March 1989, in Alaska, a super-tanker called the Exxon Valdez ran - aground. A huge amount of oil was spilt into the sea. This polluted thousands of miles of coast killing millions of fish and 30,000 sea birds. Since then, similar tragedies have occurred nearer to home, both in the Shetland Isles and, more recently, on the South Wales coast near Tenby.

The Oyster Catcher

Unstructured word: die

Have you ever seen an oyster catcher? It is quite a common bird on the rocky northern coasts of Britain. It is easily recognised by its black head, back and wings, with a contrasting white underneath. Its legs and beak are red.
This beak is long and pointed and is useful for prising shells off rocks. Oysters are not its only food as it eats a varied diet of many kinds of small shellfish. It makes its nest on the rocks or on shingle using only a few pieces of broken shell. It lays three or four eggs. These are yellow with brown blotches.
In recent years the oyster catcher has been feeding inland on worms and grubs. This change in habit from feeding mainly on the seashore to feeding inland has led to a problem for the birds. Grassland is often littered with tufts of wool, shed by the sheep grazing there. These tufts get tangled round the oyster catcher’s legs.
After a time, this wool can become so tightly bound that the - blood supply is cut off and the legs or feet drop off. If both legs are affected, the bird may die. It would have been better if the birds had stayed on the seashore to feed.

The Chinese

The Chinese are considered to be one of the first civilised races. In 1766 BC China was united by the powerful Chang family, which ruled for 700 years. From then on, until there was a revolution in 1911, many different families ruled. These included the Chins from whom China got its name. The Chinese were very advanced in many ways. At the same time, we in England were still living very primitively. In about 100 BC, they invented paper and they were the first nation to use printing. They were also very skilled in their use of medicine. They developed the method of treating illness called acupuncture. This involves sticking very fine, sharp needles into one part of the body to relieve pain in another part.  Recently there has been a great interest in this treatment in the West. A wide range of illness is treated by acupuncture in Britain today.
Their greatest achievement was the construction of the Great Wall of China.  According to legend, it was a huge dragon that was turned to stone. In fact, it was constructed by over 30,000 men in the first century BC and was made to protect China from invading tribes. When men landed on the moon in 1969, the only man-made object visible from there was the Great Wall of China!
In later years China isolated itself from Western influences. This meant that it fell behind in many areas of modern development. Now, however the links have  been restored and many large development projects are taking place there. One of these is the construction of a huge dam, the largest ever made. Do you think that it will also be visible from the moon?

Hats

Do you ever wear a hat? Did you know that about 60% of the body’s heat escapes from the head. Because of this, the first hats were worn to protect the head from cold.  Nowadays, though, a hat is more often worn to show something about its owner.
Sometimes it is part of a uniform or costume.  A policeman’s helmet is part of his uniform but also helps to protect him. The chief of an American Indian tribe always has the biggest and most decorative head dress to show his status. Sportsmen are awarded distinctive caps if they perform well.
The top hat was first worn by a London milliner in 1797. Did you know that the correct name for a person who makes hats is a milliner? The sight of him, in his huge hat, caused such an uproar that four women fainted. He was arrested and charged with disturbing the peace! In spite of this, top hats soon became a common sight on the London streets.
The bowler hat was named after its designer, William Bowler. It became a kind of uniform for the London business man, along with his briefcase and black umbrella. In the Tin Tin stories, the twins are never seen without their bowlers.
Formerly it was considered polite for a man to raise his hat when he met a lady in the street. Nowadays most of us only wear hats if the weather is extreme or for an important function, so this habit has almost died out.  Some of the finest and most expensive hats, often costing hundreds of pounds, are worn on Ladies’ Day at the Ascot races. There, the ladies vie with each other to be seen in the most striking hat!
How to Use the Channel Tunnel
Have you used the Channel Tunnel yet? Are you looking forward to using the Channel Tunnel? An AA survey showed that many drivers are very unsure about it and one in three does not understand how the service operates. 
On arriving at the terminal, the driver first purchases a ticket for the car. Next he drives through the British and French frontier controls where passports are checked. The car will then be allocated a lane in which to wait until a message board directs the driver to the correct platform. To reach the platform he drives down a wide ramp, which leads into the large open side door of the shuttle. He may have to drive forward through several wagons before being signalled to stop by an attendant. He is then instructed to turn off the engine and then, only eight minutes after loading began, the train departs.
During the 35 minute journey, drivers and passengers may leave their cars and walk around inside. the shuttle. On reaching Calais, the cars leave from the front of the train. From then on the driver must remember to drive on the right-hand side of the road! He is directed up a ramp which leads straight on to the dual carriageway along which he can continue to his holiday or business destination.
Even after this was ·explained to them, more than 50% of drivers who had recently motored abroad said that they do not intend to use the Channel Tunnel. 30% said that they do not like the idea of being shut in a tunnel for so long and the other 20% dislike the idea of being under water.

Fungi

Unstructured words: fruit fungi mould soup

Do you know the connection between bread, beer, the drug penicillin, Stilton cheese and mushroom soup? The fact is that they all depend on a fungus. Bread and beer are made with yeast, which is a tiny fungus that turns sugar into alcohol and carbon dioxide.  Penicillin, which is used to treat many infections, is made from a mould which is another sort of fungus. When you eat Stilton cheese, the green streaks are only green because they are mouldy! Mushroom soup is made from one of the most well-known families of fungi - the mushrooms and toadstools.
If you walk through a wood in Autumn a few days after it has rained, you will almost certainly see patches of red, yellow, orange or brown on the ground or growing on rotten trees. If you pause to look more closely, you will notice that these are all different kinds of fungi. However, what you see is only ‘a tiny part of the plant. Unlike other plants, a fungus cannot make its own food. Instead, it sends out a vast network of tiny white branching threads called a mycelium. These threads grow in soil or in the bark of a rotting tree and enable the fungus to absorb its food from there.
In late summer, a tiny white button or fruit body begins to form. This pushes its way to the surface and quickly develops into a visible mushroom or toadstool, thus allowing the fungus to reproduce. Next time you see a mushroom, look at the underside. You will see gills radiating out from the centre like the spokes of a wheel. These contain thousands of tiny spores which are blown around by the wind. If the spores drop to the ground or are caught in the cracks of an old tree trunk, they can begin the search for food.  If they find it, the cycle will begin again. A new fungus will begin to grow by sending out another network of tiny threads.

How Elephants Use Tools

Have you ever seen films of chimps using stones to crack nuts, or using sticks to extract termites from a termite mound?  These are well-known examples of an animal’s use of tools, yet, surprisingly, chimps are not the only animals capable of doing this.
Recent studies have shown that both wild and captive elephants are also very skilled at using tools. A captive elephant will often pick up objects which it uses to scare and chase off other animals or birds that may be trying to steal its food. In the wild, elephants spend a lot of time keeping themselves clean. Wildlife photographers love to film them using their trunks to throw dust over their bodies or to siphon up water to squirt over their backs. This helps to cool them down or to relieve the itching caused by parasites. If they are bothered by flies, they will often pick up a leafy branch to use as a fly-swat. They will also use branches to scratch those parts of their skin which their trunks alone cannot reach.
It is likely that elephants developed this way of using tools to make up for being so large and hairless. Animals with fur have some protection in the hot atmosphere of the tropics, but elephants have nothing to shield their skin from being burned by the sun.  Instead they have used their brains to work out other ways of keeping cool.
They can also find new uses for tools. More than one instance is recorded of adult  elephants piling heavy logs against a fence to enable all the herd to climb · over it. One game-park keeper also gave a graphic description of elephants deliberately blocking a new road that had been made to allow access to the herd. The elephants carried large branches and put them right across the road. When the keepers removed the branches, the elephants just carried them back again!
However, there are some instances of elephant tool-use that we do not understand.  Why do captive elephants twist hay into ropes and rings and put them on their bodies?  Why do wild elephants bury the corpses of dead elephants under a pile of dirt and vegetation? Have you any ideas?

Jaws

What picture does the word shark conjure up in your mind? Do you see a huge, black, dorsal fin cutting the water or terrifying open jaws full of rows of sharp teeth? However you imagine them, I am sure that you know how dangerous sharks can be. This was shown quite graphically in the famous film that gives its name to this passage. There are over 200 species of sharks, which are the largest of all fish. Of these, both the Blue and the White shark can grow to more than 6 meters in length.
Fortunately for us, most sharks prefer to live in warmer seas than those around our shores.  Blue sharks live in the sea round California and White sharks are found in Australian waters. They usually feed on other fish but the White shark adds to its diet by crunching turtles! These two are also the fastest swimmers of the shark family and so are the most threatening to humans. All holiday beaches in shark-infested areas are equipped with shark nets, lifeguards and shark patrols.
Despite these precautions, holiday makers are often at risk. Sharks usually attack in warm, shallow seas, often at dusk. They are most likely to attack people who are splashing about or who are bleeding in some way. This is because sharks can sense vibration and smell blood at great distances.
Many so-called shark repellents have been marketed but none has ever proved to be fully effective. If you suspect that you are about to be attacked, you should try to swim to safety as quickly and quietly as possible. If this is impossible, it has been said that facing up to the shark, or even punching it on the nose can be effective. Would you like to try it?
Have you ever seen a Tarzan film or read the story of Mowgli? Tarzan was looked after by apes in the African Jungle and Mowgli was cared for by wolves in the jungle in Asia. These are both huge jungles, but the biggest of all is the South American jungle, or rain forest, as it is more often called these days. This covers an area of 7,000,000 square kilometres. In fact about 7% of the world’s surface is covered in rain forest.
Jungles are always warm, damp and very green since rain falls almost every day, allowing plants to grow unchecked. There are three different layers of vegetation. Tall trees form a roof or canopy of leaves. In the middle there is a layer of shorter trees and beneath this is a shrub layer of shorter plants.  Hardly any light reaches the ground which is strewn with dead leaves, These decompose in the moist atmosphere to form a very fertile soil.
The ram forests are full of life. Jaguars, gorillas and antelopes are only some of the many animal inhabitants. Many kinds of brightly coloured birds live in the trees but the smallest jungle dwellers of all are the insects. Did you know that over 80% of the world’s insects live in these tropical forests?

Jungles 2

Humans live in the rain forests as well. They maintain a way of life that depends entirely on the products of the jungle. For centuries they have been making medicines from the thousands of plants growing around them.  Many of these medicines are now being used in other parts of the world.

However, this way of life is now under threat. Huge expanses of rain forest are being felled every day. The hard woods that grow there are wanted by other nations and can be sold to bring in a lot of cash. In some areas the vegetation is set alight to make open spaces for the construction of roads. In others, the trees are cut down so that farms can be established, often to breed cattle to sell as beef to the USA.
All this puts both the local inhabitants and wildlife at risk. Trees which have been cut down cannot be quickly or easily replaced. Recently ·there has been a lot of publicity about these dangers. Many people are very concerned and make an effort not to use articles made from wood from the rain forests. Some people even wear badges or T-shirts with the slogan Save the Rain Forests to show their concern! ·

Television

Did you watch television last night? Most people spend at least an hour every day watching the box as it is called, and many spend a lot longer. If you had been growing up 60 years ago, it is unlikely that you would have spent your free time in this way.

The first successful television pictures were sent by a Scot named James Logie Baird. He invented a method of sending pictures by using radio signals. In ·1924, he transmitted the image of a cross over a distance of 3 metres. The next year, he managed to send the image of a boy’s face from one room to another. In 1926, he was able to show his invention to members of the Royal Institution. This was the first demonstration of true television ever given and you can still see the equipment that was used in the Science Museum in London.
In 1929, the BBC began making some trial broadcasts and in 1936 they started transmitting regular programmes. However, it was not until twenty years later that ordinary people could afford a television set.  At this time, there was only one channel and the pictures were transmitted in black and white.
Modern television works very differently from Baird’s original experiments. The cameras take 25 still images each second.  Each image falls on a tube in three pigments, red, green and blue. The tube scans each light image into 625 horizontal lines and converts these into electric signals which are then sent by radio or cable to our homes. The sets in our homes reverse the process, changing the electric signals back to still pictures. These appear to us to be moving because our eyes go on seeing each one for a fraction of a second after it has gone off the screen.
Every set now gives us access to at least four channels. Those who have Sky or Cable Television have an even greater choice. New developments are constantly being made so that in the future we are likely to have televisions which give us an even greater choice of programmes.

Growing up in Spain

Have you ever been on holiday to Spain?  Many people like to go there on holiday because of the good weather, but have you ever thought what it would be like to live there all the time?
School life in Spain is very much like ours except that the lessons are in Spanish. However, most free time is spent out of doors because the climate is so warm and sunny. Teenagers meet in open-air cafes or wander down the main streets of the towns showing off their newest clothes. In fact, the Spanish have a passion for clothes and spend a lot more on fashion than the British, and the Spanish fashion industry is now becoming known all over the world.
Because of the midday heat, the shops shut at about 2 pm and people stop work until 5 pm. After everyone has had a break, or siesta, they return to work in the evening. Those who do not have to work will window-shop or visit bars and cafes. Very few will stay indoors.
At weekends, family picnics are often held because family life is very important in Spain. Families try to live close together so that they can help each other out when this is needed. Most teenagers still live with their parents, even when they go to university. In the villages, they live in white-washed clay or stone houses, but in the city the family is more likely to have an apartment in a tall block of flats. The national dish is paella which is made with rice and all sorts of seafood, including octopus and squid.
Since most Spaniards are Roman Catholics they often hold fiestas, which are special occasions for celebrating the local saint.  These fiestas often last for several days and involve the whole community. · The children usually help in decorating the streets and making bonfires. They join in the processions by playing music or dancing.
Would you like this sort of life?

Helicopters

Unstructured word: rotor

Helicopters have long, thin blades, rather than wings, to lift them into the air. They are ·smaller than other sorts of aircraft and cannot go as fast but they can take off from, and land on, any flat space - even a roof.
A helicopter has an engine which makes its blades spin, pushing air downwards. This lifts the helicopter up. By tilting the blades, the pilot can make the helicopter take off, move around, hover or land. To go forwards, the blades must be tilted so that they push some of the air backwards as well as downwards. Helicopters also have a small rotor on their tails which acts as a stabilizer and stops them spinning round.
Since they were first invented, helicopters have been used a great deal by the army.  Because they can hover, they are also employed to carry men to places like oil rigs and for rescue work on mountains and at sea.  Wealthy businessmen also use them as air taxis because they can travel without hindrance from other traffic, and can land in confined spaces.
Many police forces now own a helicopter, because they are especially good for traffic control. Police cars have large numbers painted on their roofs, which means that they can be identified easily from the air and can be given directions to the scenes of accidents or crimes.

Some Famous Detectives

Unstructured words: Christie Doyle famous grey Hercule Poirot

If you go to Baker Street, in London, you will see that the walls are decorated with pictures of a man with a pipe and a deerstalker hat.  These depict the detective who lived in Baker Street in London and had a friend called Watson. Do you know his name? He was created by the writer Arthur Conan Doyle, who was born in the last century and was the first writer of detective stories to become really popular. Conan Doyle wrote several long novels and over fifty short stories about this detective, who was, of course, Sherlock Holmes.
Everyone loved to read these stories and marvelled at the clever way in which Holmes used very tiny clues to work out who the criminal was. Once, Conan Doyle tried to kill off Holmes because he had become bored with writing about him. However, there was such a public outcry that he had to start again with a new story, giving a rather improbable account of how Holmes had escaped death.
Holmes became so real to many people that they actually believed that the stories were true! Many letters were sent to him at his Baker Street address which caused the Post Office some difficulty! Even today, 70 years  after Conan Doyle’s death, there is still a Sherlock Holmes Society and a museum in his honour. The books have now been translated into many other languages and are read all over the world.
Perhaps the next most famous writer of detective stories is Agatha Christie. Unlike Conan Doyle, she created several different  detectives although the two most well-known are Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot. Many of these stories have been televised and have proved to be very popular.
Miss Marple is a little old lady who sits and knits and does not appear to be at all clever.  However, she is constantly watching how people behave and listening to what they say, and she always succeeds in finding the criminal before the police. Hercule Poirot is a Belgian living in England who solves his cases by “using his little grey cells”. what do you think he means by that?
Many of these famous books are now on tape and in the public libraries. If you think that the books may be too hard for you to read, try to borrow some of the tapes. I’m sure you will enjoy them!

Clocks

Unstructured words: solar weights

What’s the time? How do you know? The earliest method of measuring time was the sundial which was first used as long ago as 3500 BC However, since this could only work if the sun was shining, the Egyptians devised a water clock. This was a pot filled with water which dripped through a small hole in the bottom. The outside edge of the pot was marked to show where the water level would be at different times of the day.
William the Conqueror had candle clocks which had evenly spaced notches marked on the side. As the candle burned down it gave a fairly accurate indication of how much time had passed. However, the first mechanical clocks were made in about 1300 AD. These worked using a system of falling weights and wheels which made them very heavy so that they had to be hung on walls, often in churches or large halls. They did not have hands or a dial but, instead, had a bell which chimed every hour. The oldest working clock, which is in Salisbury Cathedral, was made in 1386 and still ticks every four seconds.
Pocket watches and wrist watches were first made after the coiled spring was invented, making it possible to drive the tiny wheels without weights. No weights are needed as the energy is either put in by winding the mainspring, or supplied by a battery. A system of wheels and gears moves the hands round at regular intervals. Some watches are very costly because they are made of gold, silver and diamonds but many of the most popular ones today are the bright, quite cheap, Swatch watches.
More and more people now have digital watches. These have no springs or wheels but are powered by a small battery or even by solar power. A tiny crystal vibrates producing electric signals. A microchip counts the signals and shows the time as a continually changing series of numbers or digits, which show the hours and minutes.  Many people (especially dyslexic people) find telling the time with one of these much easier than having to read the position of the hands on the more traditional clock-face.

Oceans

Thousands of millions of years ago, the earth was just a mass of hot rocks. When the rocks cooled, they gave off steam which turned into water. The water drained into the uneven bumps and huge holes on the earth’s surface and formed oceans.
There is really only one ocean encircling the globe with vast stretches of land, called continents, dividing it into four. We call these the ·Atlantic, the Pacific, the Indian and the Arctic Oceans of which the Pacific is the largest and deepest. It extends almost halfway round the earth and covers more of the earth’s surface than all the continents put together. Oceans are full of an amazing variety of sea creatures. Whales have lived in the oceans longer than man has lived on land. The Blue Whale is the largest species but the Killer Whale, which can swim at 65 kilometres per hour, is the fastest.
Octopuses live in the twilight zone of the oceans, that is 200-1,000 metres under the sea. The have arms or tentacles with suckers on them. Do you know how many?  When they are in danger, some octopuses can change their skin colour from brown to green to almost white to blend in with their surroundings. Others will shoot out inky liquid to conceal themselves. Squid belong to the same family as octopuses, but often have ten, twelve or even sixteen tentacles.
Much underwater life is now threatened by pollution. Many humans treat the oceans like a giant rubbish bin, poisoning them _ with sewage and other toxic waste. Pesticides and fertilisers from farmland are also washed into the sea via rivers. These can upset the balance of both plant life and animal life. Oil spills from giant tankers add to the mess and kill sea birds and other animals by coating them with oil. Thankfully, most governments are now aware that they must ‘clean up their act’ if our oceans are to survive!

Shoes

The first shoes · were worn to protect the feet from the cold and from sharp objects. They were probably made from skin or fur fastened round the foot and ankle with cords. Some people still choose shoes for their usefulness, such as the farmers in the Netherlands who wear heavy wooden shoes called clogs because the ground is often very wet.

However, most Western people wear shoes as a fashion item even if they are difficult to walk in and may harm the feet. This is certainly not a new habit. In the Middle Ages rich men wore shoes with very long toes because the length of the toes showed how powerful and important a man was. Some were so long that they had to be lifted up and chained to the wearer’s legs to prevent him from tripping up all the time!
In the 1950s it was the women’s turn to wear shoes which were harmful to their feet, this time because of the heels. The stiletto heel was invented in Italy and was named after a dagger with a very narrow blade because the heels were so tiny and sharp. Wooden floorboards were often dotted with small holes made by these heels and consequently stiletto heels were later banned from many public places.
Twenty years later, platform shoes, so called because they were on a platform of very thick soles and heels, were the latest craze. They made people look much taller and girls often wore them with tight shorts called hot pants.  Elton John’s platform shoes were later sold for a record £4,950! Recently there has been a renewed interest in platform shoes, especially among teenagers.
Today, both sexes wear trainers much of the time. These rubber-soled canvas shoes were first made for use on the beach and were very cheap. Now there are countless different makes and shapes of trainers for all kinds of different uses and they have become high - fashion items which can be very expensive.

Christmas

Why do we celebrate Christmas on December 25th? Most of you would probably answer:
“Because Christ was born on that day.” In fact no-one knows precisely when Christ was born although we do know that he existed. The December date and most of the celebrations connected with Christmas actually originated from a time long before the Christian era.
Primitive man depended on the sun for both food and warmth. In late December after the winter solstice the days started getting lighter.  For this reason it became a very important time for a great festival or feast, celebrating the turning point of midwinter and the return of the sun.
Another reason for a great winter feast arose when cattle rearing became an important part of life. Only a small number of cattle could be fed through the winter months and so most of each herd had to be killed off as soon as hay supplies ran low. It was difficult to preserve all this meat so much of it had to be eaten quickly.
Anything which could continue to live during the cold winter months was seen as a sign of life and hope. Evergreen trees (such as holly, ivy and mistletoe) which actually bore berries in the winter, were often regarded as sacred, and were used in pagan worship.
The Romans also had a great festival at this time of year in honour of their god, Saturn.  They feasted, sang and drank wine. They lit candles and gave presents of sacred branches.  This seems to. have been the origin of present giving.
Until the 4th century AD, Easter was the great Christian feast. However, Church leaders realised that many Christians were also joining in all the pagan feasting in December. To stop this, they decided that this festival of rebirth would be a good time to celebrate the birth of Christ.
The details of the festival were then adapted to Christian teaching. Christ’s birthday was a sign of the new birth he offers to men. Present-giving was linked to the bringing of gifts to Christ by the three wise men. Evergreens were used as decorations to celebrate the eternal life that Christ offered, and drinking songs were replaced by songs with Christian words, some of which later became our well-known carols.

Computers

Most people. these days have access to a computer, but do you actually know how one works? It is made ·of a mass of silicon chips which process numbers, words and pictures.  It changes all of these into a special code, called a binary code. This is made by pulses of electric current passing through the chips which work like a series of switches. When the computer is working, millions of these pulses are passing through the chips every second.
The first programmable computer, called a Difference Engine, was designed by Charles Babbage 150 years ago. It weighed three tons. Instead of being operated by pressing keys, it had to be cranked with a handle. It was not finished until recently, when engineers at the Science Museum in London finally completed it. In November 1993, they tested it against a modern Canon Notebook weighing only a few pounds. It produced nine results before the Canon had started to produce any!
Almost every sort of office paperwork can now be done on computer and new developments occur almost daily. Although computers are getting smaller and smaller, they are able to do more and more, and can also be used for training in many jobs. For instance, pilots can now learn to fly complex, modern planes without even leaving the ground. They are trained in computer-controlled machines called flight simulators.
For some people the computer has now become their chief source of entertainment. Hundreds of different games are flooding the market The latest development in these is the creation of virtual reality. This makes you feel as if you have stepped into a world completely controlled by computer. You wear a special helmet, containing electronic equipment, which reacts to any tiny movement of the head, changing your environment as you move around.
Rival firms compete to create the most popular games, especially those designed for children. However, adults can also use games for improving their skills at sports and hobbies such as golf or chess. Have you got any computer games?

Growing Up During the Second World War(1)

Unstructured word: country

Imagine being put on a train one day with nothing but a change of clothes and being sent away from home to live with a family that you have never seen before! If you had been growing up in London or another large city 60 years ago, it is quite likely that you would have been sent away from your home to live with total strangers somewhere out in the country. You would have been an evacuee.
At that time the Germans had a much better Air Force than we did. Everyone knew that they were planning to bomb the British cities, so plans were made to move as many children as possible to safer places. No-one was forced to move, but it was suggested to all mothers that it would be best to let their children go.
London was divided into six areas that were based around the main line railway stations from which the children were to depart.  Mothers were given lists of the things that each child should take and told that they were only allowed to carry one bag and a gas mask. At that time there was a great fear that the Germans would attack with gas so everyone was issued with a mask which they had to carry with them all the time. The evacuation was actually done school by school and each day the children had to go to school wondering whether the head would announce that it was their day to go.
When that day came, they travelled on a train which was crowded with other children and often had no food or toilets. Each child had a large label pinned to him on which his name and destination were written. Some of the journeys lasted almost all day, so you can imagine how frightened and uncomfortable most of them were by the end of the journey!

Growing up During the Second World War(2)

When the children arrived at their destination they were taken to a local hall or school where all the foster parents were waiting to choose which children they would take home. Although some of them had volunteered to have a child, others, who had big enough houses, were forced to have an evacuee against their wishes. They were all paid a small sum of money each week which was supposed to cover the cost of looking after each child.  Sometimes there were not enough parents to go round, and the last few children had to be taken around from door to door until someone agreed to have them.
Often the way of life of the new family was completely different from the child’s own home life and many of them became not just homesick but also very nervous and unhappy.  Some foster parents were very generous and loving and did all that they could to help the children and make them feel welcome.  However, others resented them and the disruption that they brought to their own family life.
When a large number of children had gone to live in one village, there was often not enough room in the school for them. This meant that some children had to have lessons either in the morning or in the afternoon. In other places all the classes were increased in size. Some schools coped very well, whereas in other schools the evacuees were teased and bullied and felt very isolated.
In one week in 1939, the Government moved 1,500,000 people from large cities to safer areas. London County Council boasted afterwards that, during the whole process, it had not lost a single child or had one accident.  However, many of the children did not stay away for long. As. the months passed and fewer bombs were dropped than people had expected, it seemed less dangerous. Many mothers took their children home, not realising that the worst of the bombing was to come later.
Many of those who stayed in the country grew to love the open spaces and the peace and freedom that they experienced away from the crowds and noise of the city. They became used to rural life and very fond of their new families ‘ with whom they kept in contact long after the war had ended. 

The Piano

The piano was invented in 1709 by an Italian.  He based it on a harpsichord which is very like a piano except that the strings are plucked rather than hit. Hitting the strings has the advantage of allowing the musician to vary the volume. The great German composer, Bach, thought that this machine ‘made a frightful noise’ but before long it was being played in many concert halls.
The frame of the piano, which supports the strings, is usually made of iron while the strings themselves are made of steel. The high notes are each made up of three very thin strings to enhance the volume production. In contrast the lower notes have one very thick string. All the strings are fixed to a sounding board which is used to increase the volume.  When a note is pressed, the corresponding string is hit by a hammer. When the note is released, a damper falls onto the string to stop the sound.
Pianos have two pedals. The right one lifts all the dampers off the strings to make the sound longer, whereas the left one moves the dampers partly to one side to make a softer tone. The white keys on the keyboard were originally made from ivory and the black ones from ebony, but nowadays plastic is used instead.
In recent years, a new development has helped many more people to enjoy playing keyboard music. Electricians have developed the synthesizer which has a keyboard like a piano but makes its sounds electronically.  You can play a tune using the sound of any musical instrument, or even a barking dog!  Now you don’t have to be a great musician, or even a good electrician, to give a concert for your friends!

Waterfalls

Waterfalls are found all over the world and occur when a fiver plunges over the edge of a cliff into the gorge. The highest waterfall of all is the Angel Falls in South America which drops from a height of one thousand metres.
In 1855, the British explorer Doctor David Livingstone was crossing unmapped territory in Africa when he came across an amazing waterfall which gushed down far below him.
This waterfall was called The Sounding Smoke by those who lived there because of the clouds of mist and spray around it and the roar of the water. Livingstone renamed it The Victoria Fails, after the current Queen of England, a name which is still used today.
Perhaps the most well-known of the large falls are the Niagara Falls between Canada and the USA. They have inspired many dare-devil deeds. In 1859 a Frenchman, called Blondin, crossed these falls on a tightrope!  This amazing performance took twenty minutes. Later, he crossed three more times: once on stilts; once pushing a man in a wheelbarrow and once with his feet inside a sack.
As time passes, the rocks behind a waterfall are worn away by the constant erosion of the falling water. Caves are often formed behind the fall, weakening the rock above which eventually collapses, so that the edge of the waterfall gradually recedes upstream. ·In fact it has been estimated that the Niagara Fails have retreated 11 kilometres upstream because of this incessant erosion.

The Sinking of the Titanic

In April 1912 the largest passenger ship ever built, The Titanic, left Southampton on her maiden voyage to New York with over 2,000 people on board. She had been built using the most modem methods and had a bottom which was made of steel almost four centimetres thick. By the early hours of 15th April she was at the bottom of the sea and two thirds of those on board had drowned!
First-class travel on board the Titanic was very luxurious. There were elegantly furnished cabins, a swimming pool, Turkish baths, the latest massage machines and a gym. The tickets cost £30, which was fifteen times the average weekly wage of a skilled worker in those days!
She was fitted with a special safety system designed to stop her sinking even if she did spring a leak, and was thought to be the safest ship ever built. In fact her owners claimed that she was practically unsinkable. She was also equipped with one of the newly developed radio systems.
Several times during 14th April she received radio warnings of the danger of icebergs.  When a further crucial message came late in the evening, the radio controller was so busy sending messages from some of the passengers to their families at home that he put the warning aside.
Two hours later one of the look-outs spotted a huge iceberg right in the ship’s path. He banged a gong to raise the alarm but it was too late. The Titanic was travelling too fast to alter course and in just ten seconds a massive 90 metre gash was tom in the side of the hull. Even though she took only two and a half hours to sink many passengers would not believe that she could go down and refused to leave the ship. Some of the lifeboats actually left with empty seats!
After searching for many years, divers have now positively located the remains of the Titanic on the sea-bed. Some people have suggested that efforts should be made to raise her whereas others feel that the dead should be left in peace. What is your opinion?

Buried Treasure

Foreign word: Tutunkhamun

Have you ever dreamed of finding buried treasure? One of the most important finds ever made was in 1922 when an Englishman, Howard Carter, discovered the tomb of Tutunkhamun, one of the Kings of Ancient Egypt, in the V alley of the Kings near Luxor.
The ancient Egyptians believed that this life was only part of the cycle of existence and that, after death, a person would be reborn into the spirit world and would need to take with him all the articles that he had used here.
When a great king died, the body was preserved as a mummy. It was then buried in a very elaborate chamber constructed in a pyramid. Gold, silver and jewelled objects were piled around the body and the pyramid was sealed for ever.
The largest of all the pyramids, The Great Pyramid, is made of huge blocks of stone each weighing about two and a half tons. It was very skilfully and accurately built with the four points of the pyramid corresponding almost exactly to the four points of the compass. Despite the fact that it was built on very rocky  uneven ground, the northwest corner is only half an inch lower than the southeast corner. No-one knows exactly how pyramids were built, but it is thought that they were made from the centre outwards and that the huge blocks of stone were moved on rafts or rollers by the slaves who built them.
Over the centuries, most of the pyramids have been robbed of their treasures, but when Carter found the tomb of Tutunkhamun, it was still intact! Peering through a small hole in the wall with the aid of a candle, he saw a fabulous sight. Carefully, the pieces were removed and taken to a museum in Cairo.  One of the most striking objects was a large golden face mask found on the embalmed body. This was only one of a huge number of very beautiful, priceless articles.
In 1972 fifty of the pieces were sent to London and were displayed at the British Museum where thousands of people queued for hours to see them. That year almost every school child in England did a topic on the Ancient Egyptians!

Growing up in Japan

How many letters are there in our alphabet?  How would you like to be writing in a language that has 96 different characters? If you were starting school in Japan, that is what you would be doing at first but, later, in order to read books and newspapers, you would have to master 2,000!
School life in Japan is very competitive. As well as having lessons on Saturday mornings, many youngsters have extra classes ·after school. This is not because they are dyslexic but just to keep them well ahead in class.  Also, every day after lessons have finished, the pupils have to stay behind to clean the classrooms and tidy the playground.
Life is not all work, however, as there are many holidays. The 3rd March is Girls’ Day when all the valuable, old dolls in the house are put on display and the girls dress up in traditional costumes. Boys’ Day is on 5th May and paper carp fish are flown outside the houses, one for each boy in the family.
Special food will be eaten in addition to the normal menu of rice, hot soup, pickles and fish. Traditional Japanese food is eaten with chopsticks, which children start using from the age of three, although many Japanese are now also eating Western food such as burgers.
One of the most popular spare-time activities is reading comics, of which 1.5 billion are sold every year. Everyone reads them, from school children to businessmen travelling on commuter trains.
Another way of relaxing is to have a bath.  In a Japanese home, before you get into the bath, you sit on a: small stool next to it and wash yourself with soap. Only when you have rinsed off all the soap and dirt can you get into the bath to relax, along with other members of the family.

The First Thames Tunnel

1993 was an historic year for underwater transport as if marked the joining of the two ends of the Channel Tunnel. But ·did you know that it was also the 150th anniversary of the opening of the very first major underwater route? This was the first tunnel under the Thames.
The first attempt at such a tunnel began in 1805. After only 1,000 feet had been excavated, the workings flooded and were abandoned. In 1825, with still only three Thames bridges to serve the whole of London, the project was revived. This time the engineers in charge were the famous father and son team, Marc and Isambard Brunel.
Isambard invented a new method of tunnelling in which the workers were protected by a cast-iron shield. This was slowly jacked forward as they dug into the heavy London clay.
Two years later, Brunel held a dinner in the dripping tunnel to mark the progress of the work. It was lit by gas lamps and music was played by the band of the Coldstream Guards.  Soon afterwards, the water broke in, killing some of the workmen. Brunei himself was nearly drowned and work stopped completely for several years.
However, the need for the tunnel was so great that work was eventually started again and the tunnel was finally completed. On 28th March 1843 it was opened as a public footway.  It proved to be a huge tourist attraction and, on the first day, 50,000 people paid the tuppenny toll for the thrill of walking on dry land under the Thames. In July of that year Queen Victoria herself walked through the tunnel.
Twenty years later the tunnel was sold to the East London Railway and the first train drove through it in 1869. Later it became part of the London Underground. Next time you ride between Wapping and Whitechapel, think about the history of the tunnel through which you are speeding.

William Harvey

When you have a bad cut do you ever wonder why the blood flows out so quickly? You have probably never heard of William Harvey but he was the first person to realise that our blood is pumped round our bodies. In the early seventeenth century, he published a book which has been called the most important medical book ever written. In it he described how the blood system works in humans and animals.
Harvey had spent many years studying the human body. He had experimented on over forty different types of animal and had done a great many sums. At last he was convinced and was able to convince others, that our heart is a pump. He said that it pumped about seventy-two times a minute. This finding has since been verified by much more modem equipment than he was able to use.
He discovered that blood that is full of oxygen is pumped from the left hand section of the heart, through the arteries and taken all round the body. At this stage, the blood is a bright red. As it circulates, body processes use up the oxygen and replace it with carbon dioxide. This turns the blood a bluish-purple before it ·is returned to the heart, through the veins.
This blue blood goes into the right hand section of the heart from where it is pumped to the lungs. I expect you know that when you breathe, you are breathing oxygen into the lungs and breathing out carbon-dioxide.  Without this continual exchange of gases, you would quickly die, as your body cannot function without a regular supply of oxygen.
Because of this circulation system, it is possible for someone with a good supply of blood to “give blood” to be used by other people. If a small tube is inserted into a vein in the arm, blood will be pumped along it, instead of going back to the heart, and can easily be collected for use on an accident victim or someone having major surgery. A healthy adult will quickly make up the lost blood and will not be harmed in any way.
It is also possible for doctors to treat those parts ·of our body, which cannot be easily reached, by using injections. Drugs can be injected into the veins in our arm, for example, and carried in the blood to the part of the body where they are needed.
Next time you have an injection, think about William Harvey whose research helped to make it possible.

The Abbotsbury Swannery

Have you ever visited the Swannery at Abbotsbury in Dorset? It is situated at the head of the Fleet Lagoon and was established in the Middle Ages by monks who bred the swans to provide fresh meat to eat during the winter. Ever since then there have been swans at Abbotsbury which is the only managed colony of swans in the world.
Every year in April, all the swans leave the water and settle on a flat meadow where they compete for space to make their nests. There are about 300 nests in an area of three acres!
All the best nesting material and sites are taken by the older birds. Luckily for the others, the Swannery employs a swanherd who cuts extra twigs and rushes and piles them up for the swans to use. When the nests are finished they look just like large, untidy heaps of reeds with a large swan perched on the top.
The rests are so close together that there is never enough space for all the cygnets to be reared. (Did you know that a young swan is called a cygnet and a female swan is called a pen?) To prevent overcrowding and squabbling, many early hatchlings are removed to · special enclosed breeding areas.
In each of these, one pen will foster a large number of cygnets. In its first week of life a cygnet can be deceived into accepting any large white bird with black feet as its parent, and the pen seems quite content to receive the additions to her family. They are kept together until the cygnets are large enough to be released into the wild.
Each year, in early May, once the nests are completed, the swannery is opened to the public. If you visit in late May or early June, you will see the meadow crowded with fluffy grey cygnets which do not turn white until they are fully adult. The swans show very little interest in the visitors and will nest very close to, or even on, the paths. If you are lucky enough to be present when the whole flock takes to the air at once and flies off over the Fleet, it is not a sight or sound that you will quickly forget!

Trousers

Foreign words: Nimes Strauss

Did you know that long trousers were not worn in England until the late eighteenth century? Two centuries before that most men wore hose, which were a sort of woollen stockings like today’s leggings. They were worn with very short padded trousers. Later, baggy breeches and then pantaloons. were all the rage until · modern trousers became common.
However, there have been many different types of trousers: in the 1920s, golfers and other sportsmen liked plus-fours and, at the same time, the first flares were seen in Oxford. These huge trousers were sometimes as wide as 63 cm. at the bottom.
They were called Oxford Bags because they were mostly worn by students to cover their rowing shorts. The first trousers for women were invented in 1850 by a Mrs. Angela Bloomer. These were very baggy and gathered at the ankles and were called bloomers. They caused a great outcry as they were considered very unladylike! Before this, women had ridden horses, played golf and tennis and even sailed in long skirts. Even today, there are some times and places where a woman wearing trousers would be frowned upon.
Today, almost everyone has a pair of jeans or denims. These were invented by Levi Strauss who arrived in America in 1850. It was the time of the Gold Rush and he hoped to make his fortune by selling canvas tents to the miners. He soon realised that miners needed strong trousers more than they needed tents, so he started making overalls which sold very quickly. He finished them off with rust-proof copper rivets to strengthen the pockets. These were the very first Levis!
The material was first made for him at a place in France called Nimes. It was a kind of cotton called serge de Nimes, which became the single word denims.

Lasers

Have you ever been fascinated by a hologram and wondered how it is made? Holograms are three-dimensional pictures made by illuminating objects with laser light I expect you know that light travels in straight lines and that white light is made up of the colours of the spectrum which can be separated out.  Each different colour of light has a different wavelength. Red light has long waves and blue light has short waves.
The light produced by lasers is quite different. It is all on the same wavelength which means that a beam of light produced by a laser can easily be concentrated onto a tiny point. When this is done, enough heat can be produced to turn a metal, such as steel, into a vapour. In this way, lasers can be used to make very accurate cutting tools which can even cut through diamond, the hardest substance known.
Lasers are quickly becoming one of the most important developments of our time, as more and more uses for them are being found.  As well as making good cutting tools in industry, lasers make very good “knives” for surgeons. The laser “knife” is completely sterile. It seals small blood vessels as it cuts, so that less blood is lost.
Another common use of lasers is in eye surgery in the treatment of detached retinas.  This is a common eye disorder which can be rectified by using a laser to “weld” the retina to the back of the eye. Lasers are also frequently used in delicate brain surgery.
Much of the potential of lasers has yet to be explored. For instance, holograms are no longer used just for artistic effect. They are now being used more and more. for security purposes on credit cards and similar documents because they are extremely difficult to forge.

Nuclear Power

The subject of nuclear power causes many arguments and raises many questions. Is it safe or does it put all our lives at risk? Is it the best source of energy for us to develop?
Nuclear energy is produced by the splitting of atoms. In some substances like uranium the particles from one split atom can split surrounding atoms. This is called a chain reaction which, if not properly controlled, can cause an explosion. Provided it is kept under control, the heat given off can be used to make steam to drive electric generators.
One ton of uranium can produce as much energy as 20,000 tons of coal, so it is a very economic way of generating power. It does not give off harmful gases so there is no global warming or acid rain produced.
However, there are drawbacks. After a few years in a reactor, nuclear fuel has to be replaced. In Britain, it is taken by train to Sellafield in Cumbria. Some of it can be recycled but the rest has to be stored safely by being encased in solid glass blocks or put inside steel tanks with double walls. It may then take 200,000 years for the radioactivity of the waste to disappear!
Waste disposal is not the only problem.  Many people - think that the reactors themselves are unsafe. On 25th April 1986, the reactor at Chernobyl in the USSR caught fire. It spread radioactive particles far and wide. Since radiation can damage body cells and cause cancer, it is believed that nearly 40,000 people could eventually die because of that disaster.
In Britain at the moment only 7% of the energy we need is generated from nuclear fuel. The French, however, have built more than fifty nuclear power stations which produce more than half of their electricity.

Building Dams

Have you ever seen a dam and wondered how it can hold back so much water? The secret lies in the design. All dams are wider at the bottom that at the top. 1bis is because the water at the bottom of a lake or river is squashed down by the water on top, so that it is under more pressure. The deeper the water, the greater the pressure and the stronger the dam has to be. Four main types of dam are used.  These include embankments of earth and rock, and the three kinds of concrete dams: gravity, arch and buttress.
Embankment dams, which are the simplest and oldest type of dam, are also the biggest. They are usually made from banks of earth or sand, pressed down by heavy machinery. The sloping side facing the oncoming water is lined with stones and rocks to prevent the soil from being washed away. An embankment dam must be strong, broad and heavy to be safe and so some are made with rock instead of soil. A rock-fill dam is heavier than an earth dam, so it need not be as broad, but a layer of clay may be needed, to stop leakages through gaps in the rocks.
Concrete is a mixture of gravel, sand, cement and water, which can be moulded into almost any shape. When it has set hard, it is very strong and can resist the force of compression. The strongest type of concrete is called reinforced concrete which has steel wires inside to make it stronger. Sometimes the wires are stretched while the concrete is still wet. When it dries, they pull back to their original length. This force stresses the concrete, making an extremely strong material which is highly suitable for dam building.
Concrete dams are much thinner than embankment dams, because concrete is stronger and heavier than earth and rock. A gravity dam is rather like an embankment dam, but usually the side that faces the ·oncoming water is straight. It supports the water by its own sheer weight. Buttress dams can simply be straight concrete walls, held up by triangular buttresses, which brace the dam firmly against the valley floor.
Concrete arch dams are very strong. The walls can be as thin as three metres in width and still hold back deep reservoirs. The strength of the arch dam lies in its shape. It is like an arch bridge lying on its side, pointing into the water.  The weight of the water is spread around the curve of the arch until it meets the side of the valley. There the arch is supported by solid foundations, which anchor it firmly. In fact the pressure of the water actually helps an arch dam. It pushes against the concrete, compressing it and making it even stronger. It also squashes the dam against the valley side firmly so that it cannot move. Consequently you are most likely to see one of these in a steep-sided, narrow valley.

Growing Up in Israel

If you were growing up in Israel, as a strict Jew, your life would be based on beliefs and customs that are many centuries old. Each week you would keep the Sabbath. This is a holy day which lasts from sunset on Friday to sunset on Saturday. During the year there would be many days of either fasting or feasting to mark different events in Jewish history. The most important of these is the Passover when Jews remember how God helped their ancestors to escape from Egypt.
Strict Jews follow a special kosher diet and never eat foods like pork or shellfish. Meat is never taken at the same meal as dairy products and some wealthy people even have two different kitchens to prepare these foods. Each day begins with a big breakfast including vegetables, cheese and yoghurt. Dinner is usually chicken or turkey, again with lots of vegetables and fruit or fruit juice.
Most people live in family homes as we do, but some Jews choose to live in communities called kibbutzim. Here the children live together in a children’s community. They only see their parents for a short time after work and on the Sabbath or other holy days. On a kibbutz people do not work for money, but for food, clothes, education and health care. Everyone is given as much of these as they need but no more. Would you like to live on a kibbutz?  Can you think what you would like and what you would dislike about it?
Each Jewish man and single woman must serve in the army. Women serve for two years and men for three. This is because the Jews are very afraid of attacks from nearby Arab lands.  The Arabs feel that parts of their land were taken unjustly to create Israel and many lives have been lost on both sides from these disputes about land ownership. Recently, however, there have been some important moves towards peace between the two sides.
If you were an Arab child in Israel, your life would be very different. You would attend different schools from Jewish children and have a different way of life based on Muslim beliefs.

The Honey Bee

Do you like honey? An old rock painting in a cave in Spain shows primitive men removing honey from a nest of wild bees so we know that man has used it for thousands of years. It is still used a great deal today because it is a very good food for everyone. It is especially good for people who are ill as it gives energy quickly and is very easily absorbed by the human body. Some bees still live in the wild but today many are bred in hives that are managed by a bee keeper. A group of such hives is called an apiary.
There are three types of bee in each hive; the queen, the drones and the workers. The queen is bigger than the others and rarely leaves the hive. She is the only bee that can lay eggs. In fact this is the only task she has. She is fed and groomed by the workers and may lay as many as 2,000 eggs a day.
Drones are the males of the hive and some of them will mate with the queen. They appear to be very slow and lazy and their buzz is a very low droning hum from which, of course, they get their name. They take no part in producing food but eat a great deal, so that when winter comes, they are dragged out of the hive by the workers and left to die of hunger and cold.
Almost all the bees you see flying around will be workers since they make up 98% of the colony. They gather both nectar and pollen from flowers. Nectar is the sweet liquid that plants produce to attract the insects they need for pollination. It consists of sugars dissolved in water, which the bees carry back to the hive in their honey stomachs, to be changed into honey. Pollen is fine and dusty and brushes off onto the bees’ bodies as they collect the nectar. Using their legs, they then brush it into their pollen sacs. Once they are back at the hive, the pollen is stored in special wax cells and later used as food. ·
Bees have a fantastic system of navigation.  They seem to find their way using the position of the sun and the pattern of light in the sky.  They also have very complex methods of telling other bees where to find a good source of nectar.  They do this by dancing round outside the hive in different patterns according to how far away the food is and in which direction it lies. Next time you enjoy some honey remember the clever, tiny, hard-working creatures that produced it!

Whales

Whales live in all the oceans of the world and many of them make long journeys from one place to another, moving to colder seas in the summer for food and returning to warmer waters in the winter to breed. There are two main types of whales; the toothed whales, which usually eat fish or squid, and the baleen whales. These have rows of filters in their mouths made of baleen with which they strain their food from the water. Their main foods are plankton and krill, which are like tiny shrimps.
Although they look like giant fish, whales are actually mammals and give birth to live offspring which they suckle. They have a thick layer of fat, known as blubber, under their skin to keep them warm and have to rise to the surface every time they breathe.  Sometimes they leap right out of the water to raise the alarm or to attract a mate. The blue whale is the largest and heaviest animal in the world. Some grow to 30 meters in length and weigh as much as thirty elephants. Even a baby may weigh 5 tonnes.
Whales often sing a ‘song’ in the form of yelps, squeals and rumbles. This can be heard up to twenty miles away and is thought to be a form of communication. Divers say that swimming next to a humpbacked whale in full song is like sitting inside a cathedral organ - very noisy indeed!
In the past whales’ blubber was melted down to make oil, and baleen (or whalebone), was turned into umbrella spokes or used to make ladies’ corsets. During World War II, meat was in such short supply that a great many whales were eaten. So many whales have been killed this century that there is a great risk that they may become extinct.  Thankfully, most nations now support the ban on whaling but, in some countries, like Japan, whale meat is still sold and can bring in a lot of money as it costs up to £70 a kilo. The Whale and Dolphin Society is fighting to protect the whales that remain.

Mistletoe

Were you kissed under the mistletoe last Christmas? Mistletoe has been regarded as a special plant since very primitive times.  This may be partly because it has its berries in mid-winter but also because of its strange way of growing. Unlike most plants it does not put roots into the earth; in fact it does not touch the earth at all but grows high up on the branches of trees as a parasite.
Birds enjoy eating the juicy white berries which have very sticky seeds. Some of these find their way into cracks in the bark of other suitable trees, having been carried there on the birds’ beaks or feet. Mistletoe will grow on several different types of tree but flourishes best on apple or pear trees and seldom does the tree any harm.
In spring the seeds will start to push roots down under the bark and will get into the sap that the tree is drawing up for its own leaves.  Provided that the plant has access to the tree’s sap it will grow quite quickly and will soon become visible as a large ball of green mistletoe leaves. When winter approaches and the host tree has lost all its leaves, this huge ball of leaves can look very weird on the bare branches.
Perhaps it was partly because of this, that early man came to think of this plant as having magical powers. It was particularly important in the culture of the Druids. At different times it was thought that it could repel witches, cure toothache or increase fertility. However, as the berries are poisonous to humans, it was also used in less pleasant ways!
In England, long before it became traditional to have a Christmas Tree, mistletoe was used in the kissing bough, a large garland which was hung in the hall at Christmas time. This was the origin of our present custom of hanging it up at Christmas.

Elephants

It is thought that the modem elephant evolved 5 million years ago. One of its early ancestors was the huge woolly mammoth which roamed the plains of Europe, hunted by early man. Today, there are two species of modem elephants. The African elephant is distinguished by its very large ears and two-lipped trunk whereas the Indian elephant has much smaller ears and a single-lipped trunk.
Elephants roam the forests of India and the plains of Africa, eating a vegetarian diet of leaves, grasses and bamboo shoots. They live in large family herds of about thirty animals.
They are easily recognised by their huge bodies, which are covered in tough grey hide, their ivory tusks, which are actually extra- long incisor teeth, and their long trunks, which are used for drinking. An adult elephant will drink 180 litres of water a day, and even an elephant calf will need up to 25 litres of milk daily. Needless to say, in a hot, dry season they often find it difficult to get enough water.
For thousands of years, armies have used elephants to transport their equipment and even to attack their enemies. One such famous occasion was in 219 BC when Hannibal took 3 8 elephants across the Alps from France into Italy. More recently, (in World War Two) the Japanese army used elephants to carry equipment. Indian elephants are easier to train than African elephants. For many years they have been used both to carry logs in the forests and for riding. In fact, riding around on decorated elephants used to be the ultimate status symbol in parts of India!
The rarest elephant of all is the ‘white elephant’ which is a very pale version of the Indian elephant. These were regarded as sacred, had to be looked after very well and could not be trained for work. Our phrase ‘white elephant’ comes from them because it means something which is very expensive but completely useless.
Man is the only real enemy of the modem elephant. Thousands of elephants have been shot by poachers for their tusks. These are cut off the carcasses which are then left to rot. If the dead animal happens to be a female with a calf, then the orphan will almost certainly die as well. The tusks are sold to be turned into valuable ivory jewellery and ornaments. In an effort to stop this unnecessary slaughter, the international trade in ivory was made illegal in 1989.  Nevertheless, despite the efforts of the game wardens employed to protect the elephants, poaching still continues.